---
title: MIT 2100 - Lecture 1, Course Overview
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-06 14:30:00
---	

# Course Overview: MIT 2500
  
## Structure Matters
		- Media technologies function in society to a large degree because of how they are organized or structured. (the media does not just "give people what they want")
		- Some things that determine structure include: technology, economics, social hierarchies, institutions, and cultural forms
		- Structural determinants exist in history, and thus form "conditions not of our own making"
## Culture, Imagination and Meaning Matter
		- The media do not amke things, they make signs and symbols
		- Signs and symbols only owrkin  the context of a shared culture, a shared system of meaning
		- How people interpret and experience the media, what life feels like, is as important as what the media produce.
		- This is why an organizing concept in this course is structure of feelings
## Ideas Matter
		- People do what they do, in media and elsewhere, because of what they (often implicitly) belive: eg; what is freedom? What is fairness? Are social media freedom or opression
		- Media is not driven by market or external facotrs. What principles people use when looking at and understanding media will shape the way media is.
## The media are changing
		- The media have never been that stable, but they are in a period of dramatic flux now
		- How the media matter in modern society, therefore, will be determined by what the emdia become in the future, not just by what they are now
		- How the media change is a matter of political and osical chance, not just a matter of, say, technology and money
## Therefore: the media re not just a thing that happens t you; if you're willing to thing about it and take some action, the future of the media (at least partly) up to you.
	- The grid of modernity: industrialization:
		- Modern media are not one thing; National Geographic Story
	- 1985: photo of refugee on cover. Orphaned by russian bomb, fled to refugee camp. Forces to look at her as a person. Became most famous photograph ever published in National Geographic
	- The girl in the photo: never seen original photo, came into very little contact to magazine. She had never seen the photo.
	- Spent most her life outside the matrix of modern systems of communication. This course is veymuch about those systems of communication. Connecting people with webs of communication
	- What have we done to ourselves by building these globally massive systems of communication?
	- What does it mean to live within the grid of the modern world?
	- Live in the "grid of modern world" modernization -- the shift from agricultural to industrialized ways of life.

### John Snow
	- Used numbers, stats, maps to find large patterns
	- Was meticulous and thorough in his collection of facts and details
	- Did not ascribe outcomes to "innter" traits of individuals; "the poor were not lacking in character, they were being poisoned."
	
