---
title: MIT 2500B - Lecture 2 - Structures
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-13 14:30:00
---
# Structures
### Prof. Thomas Streeter

The orgnaizing features of this course relate to structures and feelings. Next week, we will be reading Raymond Williams framework as to how structures and feeling work.

Today, we are going to talk about social structures, very broadly. Social structures
## Overview
- Social Structures: 
we sometimes bump into structures, and they makeup the fabric of our being. It is sometimes, "just the way the world is". 

## What are social structures?
- they are eusive, cannot hold in your hand; nor pick up a social structure, you cannot walk into a social structure like a room or a building. The semi-invisibility is still often the case why people think 'it's all about myself'; people don't like to take responisibility. It is real.
- Social structures require abstraction to understand ("The bird's eye view")
    - John Snow had to do alot of abstraction to figure out the roots of cholera; many decades later the germ theory started to be constructed.
    - In early victorian London, England; it was in part population density. Snow looked at water and sewer infastructure, as well as human interactions with technologies.
    - Generally what we are trying to get at; you may have heard the term "social relations/social formations"
        - Social forces, marxist tradition: relations of production are the driving force of epochs
- Density, relation to landmarks
- Different theories, approaches:
    - Social relations, social forces, modes and relation of production etc.
- Today: inequalities, technologies, cultural forms, and economic systems as social structures.

### Today, we will look at 4 types of social structure:
1. Inequalities
2. Technolgoies
3. Cultural forms
4. Economic systems

## Social inequalities as Structures
- Social inequalities: class, race, ethnicity, gender and sexuality
    - today we still have paste systems, where we are born into our class or societal standing.
- Social class is a thing that is not inherrant in people. We are not born with a licence plate on our forheads that says ``Lower-Middle``
- The best predictor is how much money your parents make when you are a child
- Social mobility is how people are able to move up and down the income scale.
- Teaching in the states, Americans hate that they are a class society, but they are one of the most stratified cultures on earth.
    - statistics show that your parents income is very sticky in the US. It is very rare to move from the bottom 1/5 to the top 1/5th.
    - Canada, however is one of the best at this; due to the relatively equal access to education and social support structures.
        - your parents income is still a good feeler to know how you are going to do.
- Race and ethicity
    - looking at income metrics, in 2013 the median income of worker was between $50-51k/yr. The income for a visibile minority worker was $41k.
    - if someone could look at you and tell you were not white european, your income will be $~5,000 less/yr; if you are indiginous, there is an approximate $10k nower
    - Women get $0.85 on the dollar from men.
    - avg. $0.75; women take the braise of raising children.
    - Social inequalities do not determine everything, but if you look at certain video games, you come to a path where you have extra powers, if you are a white male, you have those extra powers in life.
    - One of the dangers of talking about class this way, we don't only move through life as a(n) white male, asian female, etc.
- Intersectionalities: point at pressures and constraints. You can't be surprised if people use their social identities as sway. 
    - it does excert a force, more like rock in stream than a steal girder.

## Technological Structures

Technology creates structures, communication tech in particular. As a writing technology: feather and ink; the steel nib dipping pen; there was a fine art to sharpening the nib. The steel nib got around quite a few of these issues, as the steel didn't make you stop as often. Later, the fountain pen became popular; the fun of it was chewing the catridges and watching it burst (lol). In the 1800's the typewriter came along, making an error, having to start over. People still talk about pounding out a paper. Voice technologies: Alexander Ghram Bell - Communicating over distance using voice. Before automatic switching: pick up the phone, crank and bell would ring in operator's office. You would then ask "who can i connect you with?". The man that started the automatic switchboard was positive that people were listening to the calls. The rotary phone soon came, then the 'touchtone' phone came along, then in 1990's the cellphone started to break into societal structures, soon to be superceeded by the smartphone.

#### The Telephone
- Each of these technologies have altered how culture is lived. The family dynamic of "SUZIE, IT'S FOR YOU!" people had to interact with eachother and know who they were going to interact with over the phone.
- You could generally figure out who your parents are communicating with over the phone; now you can't tell who they are talking to, unless you are over their shoulder. The den with a closed door, the kids couldn't tell what you were saying. Now this privacy is where you are on a different planet than your parents.
- Technology has impacted how we communicate

#### The Dipping Pen
Prof. Streeter went through some old family boxes, dug out a message from his grandfather in 1895; the family was spread out in generation. He was writing home from college to his mother. In a world of no phones, no cars; 40 miles from home. 40 miles was 2 days hike on foot, or a day on horse. In 1895, the railroad had become a modern form of transportation. One could get from Johnstown to S.... The train ride was becoming a pretty normal thing. Writing a letter started to become a normal form of message transport. 
- People would write down background of their life. You could figure out class; little stoves in college. "the ink is getting thick" (starting to freeze). The ink likely had freezing temp under that of water; starts to apogize for penmanship because of the shivering; penmanship was something tightly rrelated to college.
- goes back to writing on a laterdate, quite common when people would connect their life to others using medium of paper and ink. He wrote differently, oil in lamp was freezing. 
    - signature used to be a way of saying "this is me". 
    - on the back of the signature, PS, PPS, PPPS....

#### The Mixtape
- way of communicating through music.

The point is: it is good to imagine how relationships are built with people and have different structures. We now go from lecture to the cafeteria and sit on our phones... We need to look at what it does to us (culturally)

## Cultural Forms as Structures
We are going to quickly review the structure.
What is cultural structure "mary had a little ___" *lamb*
- Communication proceeds on top of pre-existing cultural forms.
we are often surrounded by these, most cultural forms are "like a water is to fish" (McLuhan)
### Look at pictures and think....
- Most viewers, at least from the west find the images of the men odd or laughable, yet the images of women charming or attractive.
- Why should it seem funny for an adult man to be doing the same pose as a women?
- In ordinary life, neither adult men or women strike poses like this. In western cultures, it would seem strange to do the same poses struck by men.

Thee is a famous study of this, "the gaze" there is a sociologist Gothman, he wrote about gender advertisements, he looked at poses: models are often posed in what he called "the recumbant position", which relies on being defenseless, supplicant. Floors are also one of the less clean parts of a home, etc.
- look at the dates, pattern is consistant in how women have been represented.

Cant
- Supplicant kind of thing - bend in the body. Appeasement, submission... etc 

*streeter puts finger on corner of mouth*, audible laugh

Images are for women to look at. Why?
- While there is a male gaze here, these ads are directed at women.
- not the expectation that men will look at them. Why are there all of these images with poses of women in subordination, etc. Look carefully at how the woman in the ad is looking at you; there is something knowing about it. She is saying "i know that you know that i know what i'm doing"
- being in control of the male gaze; demonstrating the mastery of the male gaze. 
- This ad, pretty explicit, put image of her eyes but looking right at you, even though it is off canter; you can aspire to be me. 
"she looks at me, talks to me and tells me that I have the ability to 'be her'"
- the models are posed to know that they are being looked at. They are controlling or mastering the act of being looked at.
- The childish submissive postures show control of the gaze.

#### People in Advertisements: Doctor
- People playing a doctor in a show, showing off. The male gaze; strategic defferential posing down...
- Not the same as getting your own power.

### There is still a question: "WHO CARES?"
- Men and women look at funny things, like James Bond or a Fasion magazine... Just part of the feel or cultural form that is there.
- It doesn't just invade your brain and make you feel stupid... That's not how it works.
- When you grow up in cultural forms, you don't adhere to those codes, but you are still able to look at that adherance.

### Conditions of intelligibility
- If dressed like a fashion model, people will look at like a fasion model, but cannot step outside of this.
- Can become something we can embrace or citicize but something we cannot ignore.
- In a professional context, we can look at Michel Foucault's work, "Conditions of Intelligibility"
    - raises the question
    - pouting: his character looks at a fasion magazine where women is pouting
        - people outside the culture say "it looks like she's been punched", but is actually the power being excerted.

## Economic Structures
Economic structures are also something in our lives, it isn't just about "who has the money", but instead to understand the social organization of relations between people around production. When Marx came into London, there was a new economic system that has people working for other people. They noticed that there were alot of peasents that were being pushed out of agriculture, instead moved to industrial manufacutring; making cloth. If you were a peasent in the early modern era, you didn't get to keep what you raised, instead you had to give some to the lords. The model, the structures by which people were making money were radically changing. Europe was still being dominated by Kings, they looked at the buisness structure and said "they're doomed". This is kind of like knowing that cholera is being caused by flow of water... Looking at not only the rich/poor division but also at how the whole thing was organized.
- Look at the buinsess model being utilized today:
towards that end, we'll be looking at "Black Mirror: Fifteen Million Merits"
    - before we leave, we are going to look at how to talk about it: how this collection of signs and symbols making it make sense?
    - now generally, Black Mirror is a series that produces fables: little tales not based on reality but use fictional characters to reflect realities. Part of what is unique about it is the thoughtful discussion of everyday life; and people that have grown up with new technologies.
    - It's really not about the future, but instead the future based on today's reality. In 2011, Google went from expriement to one of the the dominant corperations in the world. 
        - realized that advertising as a buisness model made it easy for advertisements. Google discovered that you could map how people do searches.
        - doing a search for new shoes, then every ad you see across the web is for new shoes.
    - Facebook
        - Social networks: in 2011, it had gotten to the point where it went to IPO (Intital Public Offering)
        - In 2010, Facebook has decided to adopt a similar buisness model.

```
Break
```