---
title: The Ghost Map
author: Steven Johnson
date: 2020-01-13 14:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-2
    - readings
---
## The Investigator 

Snow's mastery of ether and chloroform raised him to a new echelon in the London medical world. He became themost sought-after anesthesiologist in the city, assisting with hundreds of operations a year. By the 1850s, a growing number of doctors were recommending chloroform as a palliative for the discomfort of childbirth. As the birth of her eighth child approached in thespring of 1853, Queen Victoria decided to give chloroform a try, encouraged by the scientifically astute Prince Albert. Her choice of ananesthesiologist was an obvious one. Snow gave the episode a fewmore words than usual in his casebooks, though his tone did not be-tray the magnitude of the professional honor that had been bestowed upon him:

    Thursday 7 April: Administered Chloroform to the Queen in her confinement. Slight pains had been experienced since Sunday. Dr. Locock was sent for about nine o'clock this morning, stronger painshaving commenced, and he found the os uteri had commenced to dilate a very little. I received a note from Sir James Clark a little after ten asking me to go to the Palace. I remained in an apartment near that of the Queen, along with Sir J. Clark, Dr. Ferguson and (for the most part of the time) Dr. Locock till a little a [sic] twelve. At a twenty minutes past twelve by a clock in the Queen's apartment I commenced to give a little chloroform with each pain, by pouring about 15 minims [0.9 ml] by measure on a folded handkerchief. The first stage of labour was nearly over when the chloroform was commenced. Her Majesty expressed great relief from the application, the pains being very trifling during the uterine contractions, and whilst between the periods of contraction there was complete ease. The effect of the chloroform was not at any time carried to theextent of quite removing consciousness. Dr. Locock thought that thechloroform prolonged the intervals between the pains, and retardedthe labour somewhat. The infant was born at 13 minutes past one bythe clock in the room (which was 3 minutes before the right time); consequently the chloroform was inhaled for 53 minutes. The placenta was expelled in a very few minutes, and the Queen appeared very cheerful and well, expressing herself much gratified with the effect of the chloroform.

Snow's research into anesthesia had elevated him from a surgeon ofhumble origins to the very apogee of Victorian London. But, in away, the most impressive thing about his research was not the levelsof social class that he traversed but rather the intellectual strata, thedifferent scales of experience that his mind crossed so effortlessly.Snow was a truly consilient thinker, in the sense of the term as it •was originally formulated by the Cambridge philosopher WilliamWhewell in the 1840s (and recently popularized by the Harvardbiologist E. O. Wilson). "The Consilience of Inductions," Whewellwrote, "takes place when an Induction, obtained from one class offacts, coincides with an Induction obtained from another •different •class. Thus Consilience is a test of the truth of the Theory in whichit occurs." Snow's work was constantly building bridges between dif-ferent disciplines, some of which barely existed as functional sci-ences in his day, using data on one scale of investigation to makepredictions about behavior on other scales. In studying ether andchloroform, he had moved from the molecular properties of the gasitself, to its interactions with the cells of the lungs and the bloodstream,to the circulation of those properties through the body's overall system,to the psychological effects produced by these biological changes. He even ventured beyond the natural world into the design of technol-ogy that would best reflect our understanding of the anesthetics.Snow was not interested in individual, isolated phenomena; he wasinterested in chains and networks, in the movement from scale toscale. His mind tripped happily from molecules to cells to brains tomachines, and it was precisely that consilient study that helped Snowuncover so much about this nascent field in such a shockingly shortamount of time.

And yet, there was a ceiling to his intellectual pursuit of ether andchloroform: his research stopped at the scale of the individual subject.The next step up the chain—the larger, connected world of cities andsocieties, of groups, not individuals—did not factor into his anesthesiainvestigations. He might have attended on the queen's body, but thebody politic remained outside Snow's frame of reference.

Cholera would change all that.

We don't know exactly what sequence of events turned John Snow's interest toward cholera in the late 1840s. For this working physician and researcher, of course, the disease would have been a constant presence in his life. There may in fact have been a direct link to his practice as an anesthesiologist, since chloroform hadbeen (wrongly) championed as a potential cure for cholera by someearly adopters who were less rigorous in their empiricism than Snow.Certainly, the outbreak of 1848-1849, the most severe British outbreak in more than a decade, made cholera one of the most urgentmedical riddles of its time. For a man like Snow, obsessed with boththe practice of medicine and the intellectual challenge of science,cholera would have been the ultimate quarry.

There were practically as many theories about cholera as there were cases of the disease. But in 1848, the dispute was largely dividedbetween two camps: the contagionists and the miasmatists. Eithercholera was some kind of agent that passed from person to person,like the flu, or it somehow lingered in the "miasma" of unsanitaryspaces. The contagion theory had attracted some followers when thedisease first reached British soil in the early 1830s. "We can only sup-pose the existence of a poison which progresses independently of thewind, of the soil, of all conditions of the air, and of the barrier of thesea," The Lancet editorialized in 1831. "In short, one that makesmankind the chief agent for its dissemination." But most physiciansand scientists believed that cholera was disease spread via poisoned at-mosphere, not personal contact. One survey of published statementsfrom U.S. physicians during the period found that less than five per-cent believed the disease was primarily contagious.

By the late 1840s the miasma theory had established a far more prestigious following: the sanitation commissioner, Edwin Chadwick; thecity's main demographer, William Farr; along with many other publicofficials and members of Parliament. Folklore and superstition werealso on the side of the miasmatists: the foul inner-city air was widely believed to be the source of most disease. While no clear orthodoxy existed regarding the question of cholera's transmission, the miasmatheory had far more adherents than any other explanatory model.Remarkably, in all the discussion of cholera that had percolatedthrough the popular and scientific press since the disease had arrivedon British soil in 1832, almost no one suggested that the diseasemight be transmitted by means of contaminated water. Even thecontagionists—who embraced the idea that the disease was transmitted from person to person--failed to see merit in the waterborne scenario.

Snow built his arguement for the waterborne theory around two primary studies, both of which showcased talents that would prove to be crucial five years later, during the Broad Street outbreak. In late July of 1849, an outbreak of cholera killed about twelve people living in slum conditions on Thomas Street in Horsleydown. Snow made an exhaustive inpsection of the site and found aple evidence to support his developing theory. All twelve lived in a row of connnected cottages called the Surrey building, which shared a single well in the courtyard they faced. A drainage channel for dirty water ran alongside the front of the houses, connecting to an open sewer at the end of the courtyard. Several large cracks in the drain allowed water to flow directly into the well, and during summer storms the entire courtyard would flood with fetid water. And so a single case of cholera would quickly spread through the entire Surrey building population.

The layout of the Thomas Street lfats provided Snow with an ingenious control study for his inquiry. The Surrey building backed onto a set of houses that faced another courtyard known as Truscott's Court. These abodes were every bit as squalid as the Surrey building, with the exact same demographic makeup of poor working familie living wihtin them. For all intents and purposes, they shared the same environment, save one crucial difference: they got their water from different sources. During the two-week period that saw the deaths of a dozen residents in the Surrey building, only one person perishedi n Truscott's Court, despite the fact that both groups lived within yards of each other. If the miasma were responsible for the outbreak, why would one squalid, impoverished group suffer ten times the loss of the one living next door?

The Thomas Street outbreak showcased Snow's on-the-ground investigative skills, his eye for the details of transmission patterns, sanitary habits, even architecture. But Snow also surveyed the outbreak from the bird's-eye view of citywide statistics. During his research, Snow had amasses an archive of information about the various ccompanies that supplied water to the city, and that study had revealed a striking fact: that Londoners living south of the Thames were far more likely to drink water that had originated in the river as it passed through Central London. Londoners living north of the river drank from a variety of sources: some companies piped in water from the Thames above Hammersmith, far from the urban core; some drew from the New River in Hertfordshire to the north; others from River Lea. But the South London Water Works drew its supply from the very stretch of the river where most of the city's sewers emptied. Anything that was multiplying in the city's intestinal tracts would be more likely to find its way into the drinking water of the South London. If Snow's theory of cholera was on the mark, Londoners living below the Thames should have been significantly more prone to the disease than those living above. 

Snow next surveyed teh tables of cholera death that had been compiled by William Farr, London's registrar-general. What he found there followed the pattern that the water-supply routes predicted: of the 7,466 deaths in the metropolitan area during the 1848-1849 epidemic, 4,001 ere located south of hte Thames. That mean that the per capital casualty rate was neer eight per thousand -- three times that of the general city. In the growing suburbs of West and North London, he death rate was just above one per thousand. For the mi-asmatists, who were inclined to blame those death rates on the foul air -of the working-class neighborhoods south of the river, Snow couldpoint to the neighborhoods of the East End, which were probably themost destitute and overcrowded of any in the city And yet their deathrate was exactly half that of the area south of the Thames.

Whether you looked at the evidence on the scale of an urbancourtyard or on the scale of entire city neighborhoods, the same pat-tern repeated itself: the cholera seemed to segment itself aroundshared water supplies. If the miasma theory were right, why would itdraw such arbitrary distinctions? Why would the cholera devastateone building but leave the one next door unscathed? Why would oneslum suffer twice the losses as a slum with arguably worse sanitary conditions?

Snow introduced his theory of cholera in two forms during thesecond half of 1849: first as a self-published thirty-one-page mono-graph, On the Mode and Communication of Cholera, intended for hisinunediate peers in the medical community, and then as an article inthe London Medical Gazette, targeted at a slightly wider audience.Shortly after the publication, a country doctor named William Buddpublished an essay that came to similar conclusions about cholera'swaterborne transmission, though Budd left open the possibility thatsome cases of cholera might be transmitted through the atmosphere,and he claimed, erroneously, to have identified the cholera agent inthe form of a fungus growing in contaminated water supplies. Buddwould later make an observation regarding the waterborne transmission of typhoid, for which he is now best known, But Snow's cholera theory had beaten Budd's to the presses by a month, and it did not include the false lead of fungal agents or of atmospheric transmission.

The reaction to Snow's argument was positive but skeptical. "Dr.Snow deserves the thanks of the profession for endeavouring to solvethe niystery of the communication of cholera," a reviewer wrote inthe London Medical Gazette. But Snow's case studies had not con-vinced: "[They] furnish no proof whatever of the correctness of hisviews." He had convincingly demonstrated that the South Londonneighborhoods were more at risk for cholera than the rest of the city,but it did not necessarily follow that the water in those neighbor-hoods was responsible for the disparity. Perhaps there was special tox-icity to the air in those zones of the city that was absent in the slumsto the north. Perhaps cholera was contagious, and thus the cluster ofcases in South London simply reflected the chain of infection thusfar; if the initial cases had unfolded differently, perhaps the East Endwould have been attacked more grievously, and South London leftrelatively unscathed. There was a correlation between water supplyand cholera—that much Snow had convincingly proved. But he hadnot yet established a cause.

The Gazette did suggest one scenario that might settle the matter convincingly:
> The *experimentum crucis* would be, that the water conveyed to a distant locality, where cholera had been hitherto unknown, produced the disease in all who used it, while those who did not use it, escaped.

That passing suggestion stayed with Snow for five long years. As hisanesthesia practice expanded, and his prominence grew he contin-ued to follow the details of each cholera outbreak, looking for a sce-nario that might help prove his theory. He probed, and studied, andwaited. When word arrived of a terrible outbreak in Golden Square,not ten blocks from his new offices on Sackville Street, he was ready.

So the macro-growth of the urban superorganism and the micro-scopic subtleties of the bacterium are both essential to the events ofSeptember 1854. In some cases, the chains of cause and effect areobvious ones. Without the population densities and the global con-nectivity of industrialization, cholera might not have been as dev-astating in England, and thus might not have attracted Snow'sinvestigative skills in the first place. But in other places, the causalchains are more 'subtle, though no less important to the story. Thebird's-eye view of the city, the sense of the,urban universe as a system,as a mass phenomenon—this imaginative breakthrough is as crucial tothe eventual outcome of the Broad Street epidemic as any other fac-tor. To solve the riddle of cholera you had to zoom out, look forbroader patterns in the disease's itinerary through the city. Whenhealth matters are at stake, we now call this wide view epidemiology,and we have entire university departments devoted to it. But for theVictorians, the perspective was an elusive one; it was a way of think-ing about patterns of social behavior that they had trouble intuitivelygrasping'. The London Epidemiological Society had been formedonly four years before, with Snow as a founding member. The basictechnique of population statistics—measuring the incidence of agiven phenomenon (disease, crime, poverty) as a percentage of over-all population size had entered the mainstream of scientific andmedical thought only in the previous two decades. Epidemiology as ascience was still in its infancy, and many of its basic principles had yetto be established.

At the same time, the scientific method rarely intersected withthe development and testing of new treatments and medicines. Whenyou read through that endless stream of quack cholera cures pub-lished in the daily papers, what strikes you most is not that they areall, almost without exception, based on anecdotal evidence. What's striking is that they never apologize for this shortcoming. They neverpause to say, "Of course,- this is all based on anecdotal evidence, buthear me out." There's no shame in these letters, no awareness of theimperfection of the method, precisely because it seemed eminently• reasonable that local observation of a handful of cases might serve upthe cure for cholera, if you looked hard enough.

But cholera couldn't be studied in isolation. It was as much aproduct of the urban explosion as the newspapers and coffeehouseswhere it was so uselessly anatomized To understand the beast,you needed to think on the scale of the city from the bird's-eye view.Yo u needed to look at the problem from the perspective of HenryMayhew's balloon. And you needed a way to persuade others to joinyou there.

That wider perspective is what John Snow found himself searching for by noon on Monday. He had reexamined hissamples from the Soho wells in the light of day and found nothingsuspicious in the Broad Street water. As he delivered chloroform to apatient of a nearby dentist who was performing a tooth extraction, hepondered the outbreak still raging a few blocks away. The more hethought about it, the more convinced he became that the water sup-ply must have been contaminated somehow. But how to prove it?The water alone might not be sufficient, since he didn't even knowwhat he was looking for. He had a theory about cholera's routes oftransmission and its effects on the body. But he had no idea what theagent that caused cholera was exactly, much less how to identify it.

Ironically, just a few days before Snow had unsuccessfully at-tempted to see any telltale signs of cholera in the water, an Italianscientist at the University of Florence had discovered a small, comma-shaped organism in the intestinal mucosa of a cholera vic-tim. It was the first recorded sighting of Vibrio tholerae, and FilippoPacini published a paper that year describing his findings, under thetitle "Microscopical Observations and Pathological Deductions onCholera." But it was the wrong time for such a discovery: the germtheory of disease had not yet entered mainstream scientific thought,and cholera itself was largely assumed by the miasmatists to be somekind of atmospheric pollution, not a living creature. Pacini's paperwas ignored, and V cholerae retreated back into the invisible kingdomof microbes for another thirty years. John Snow would go to his grave never learning that the cholera agent he had spent so many years pursuing had been identified during his lifetime.

The fact that Snow had no idea what cholera looked like under themicroscope didn't stop him from doing further tests on the water. Af-ter his appointment with the dentist, he returned to draw more sam-ples from the Broad Street pump. This time he saw small whiteparticles in the water. Back in his lab, he ran a quick chemistry exper-iment, which reported an unusually high presence of chlorides. En-couraged, he took the sample to a colleague, Dr. Arthur Hassall,whose skill with the microscope Snow had long admired. Hassan re-ported that the particles had no "organized structure," which led himto believe they were the remnants of decomposed organic matter.He also saw a host of oval-shaped life-forms—Hassall called them "animalculae"--presumably feeding on the organic substances.

So the Broad Street water was not as pure as he had originallythought. But still, there was nothing in Hassall's analysis that pointeddefinitively to the presehce of cholera. If he was going to crack thiscase, the solution wouldn't be found under the microscope, on thescale of particles and animalculae. He needed to approach the prob-lem from the bird's-eye view, on the scale of neighborhoods. He would try to find the killer through an indirect route: by looking atpatterns of lives and deaths on the streets of Golden Square.

The scientific establishment was equally anchored in the miasmatheory. In September 1849, the Times ran a series of articles thatsurveyed the existing theories about cholera: "How is the choleragenerated?—how spread? what is its modus operandi on the humanframe? These questions are in every mouth," the paper observed, be-fore taking a decidedly pessimistic stance on the question of whetherthey would, ever be answered:

>These problems are, and will probably ever remain, among the in-scrutable secrets of nature. They belong to a class of questions radi-cally inaccessible to the human intelligence. What the forces arewhich generate phenomena we cannot tell. We know as little of thevital force itself as of the poison-forces which have the power to dis-turb or suppress it

Despite this bleak forecast, the Times went on to survey the prevailingtheories: a "telluric theory that supposes the poison to be an emana-tion from the earth"; an "electric theory" based on atmopheric conditions, the ozonic theory that attributed outbreaks to a deficiency ofozone in the air; a theory that blamed cholera on "putrescent yeast,emanations of sewers, graveyards, etc." The paper also mentioned atheory that maintained that the disease was spread by microscopic ani-malcules or fungi, though it downplayed its viability, claiming that thetheory "failed to include all the observed phenomena."

The diversity of views is striking here—ozone, sewer emanations,electricity—but just as striking is the underlying commonality: all butone of the theories assume that the cholera is somehow being trans-mitted through the atmosphere. (Snow's waterborne theory, already a•matter of public record, goes completely unmentioned.) The air wasthe key to the riddle of cholera, and indeed to most known diseases.Nowhere is the philosophy more pronounced than in the writings ofthe Victorian age's most beloved and influential medical figure, Flor-ence Nightingale. Consider this passage from the beginning of hergroundbreaking 1857 work Notes on Nursing:

>The very first canon of nursing, the first and the last thing uponwhich a nurse's attention must be fixed, the first essential to a patient,without which all the rest you can do for him is as nothing, withwhich I had almost said you may leave all the rest alone, is this:TO KEEP THE AIR HE BREATHES AS PURE AS THEEXTERNAL AIR, WITHOUT CHILLING HIM. Yet what is solittle attended to? Even where it is thought of at all, the most ex-traordinary misconceptions reign about it. Even in admitting air intothe patient's room or ward, few people ever think, where that aircomes from. It may come from a corridor into which other wardsare ventilated, from a hall, always unaired, always full of the fumes of gas, dinner, of various kinds of mustiness; from an underground kitchen, sink, washhouse, water-closet, or even, as I myself have had sorrowful experience, from open sewers loaded with filth; and with this the patient's room or ward is aired, as it is called—poisoned, its should rather be said.

With Nightingale, the problem is one of emphasis; there's obvi-ously nothing wrong with ensuring that hospital rooms have fresh airin them. The problem arises when supplying clean air becomes thesingle most important task for the doctor or nurse, when the air is as-sumed to be a "poison" that has caused the patient's illness in the firstplace. Nightingale believed that cholera, smallpox, measles, and scar-let fever were all miasmatic in nature, and she recommended thatschools, homes, and hospitals use a certain "air test," devised by thechemist Angus Smith, that detected organic materials in the air:

>If the tell-tale air test were to exhibit in the morning, both to nursesand patients, and to the superior officer going round, what the atmo-sphere has been during the night, I question if any greater securitycould be afforded against a recurrence of the misdemeanor.
>And oh, the crowded national school! where so many children's epi-demics have their origin, what a tale its air-test would tell! We should' have parents saying, and saying rightly, "I will not send my child to thatschool, the air-test stands at 'Horrid?" And the dormitories of our greatboarding schools! Scarlet fever would be no more ascribed to contagion,but to its right cause, the air-test standing at "Foul."
>We should hear no longer of "Mysterious Dispensations," and of"Plague and Pestilence," being "in God's hands," when, so far as weknow, He has put them into our own. The little air-test would bothbetray the cause of these "mysterious pestilences," and call upon us to remedy it.

So often what is lacking in many of these explanations and prescriptions is some measure of humility, some sense that the theory being put forward is still unproven. It's not just that the authorities ofthe day were wrong about miasma; it's the tenacious, unquestioning way they went about being wrong. An investigator looking for holes in the theory could find them everywhere, even in the writings of the miasmatists themselves. The canary in the miasma coal mine should have been the sewer-hunters, who spent their waking hoursexposed to the most noxious—sometimes even explosive—air imag-inable. And yet, bizarrely, the canary seemed to be doing just fine, andMayhew admits as much in one slightly puzzled passage in *London Labour and the London Poor*:

>It might be supposed that the sewer-hunters (passing much of theirtime in the midst of the noisome vapours generated by the sewers,the odour of which, escaping upwards from the gratings in thestreets, is dreaded and shunned by all as something pestilential) wouldexhibit in their pallid faces the unmistakable evidence of their un-healthy employment. But this is far from the fact. Strange to say, thesewer-hunters are strong, robust, and healthy men, generally florid intheir complexion, while many of them know illness only byname.Some of the elder men, who head the gangs when exploring thesewers, are between 60 and 80 years of age, and have followed theemployment during their whole lives

As Snow observed many times in his writings during the period,there were countless cases of groups sharing the exact same livingenvironment, breathing the exact same air, who seemed to have en-tirely opposing responses to the allegedly poisonous vapors. If the miasma was truly killing off Londoners, it seemed to' choose its victimsin an entirely arbitrary fashion. And despite the fact that Chadwickand his commissions had made immense progress in eliminating thecity's population of cesspools, the cholera had nonetheless come roar-ing back to devastate the city in 1853.

John Snow spent most of Tuesday searching for patterns. In the morning he was knocking on doors, interrogating strangers in the street, asking anyone he encountered for anecdotal evidence about the outbreak and its victims. The clues he found were tantalizing, but too many doors went unanswered, and the dead couldn't report on their recent drinking habits. Personal testimony would not take him far in an evacuation zone. And so at midday hepaid a visit to the Registrar-General's Office, where Farr gave him anearly look at the numbers being calculated for the week. Eighty-threedeaths had been reported in Soho between Thursday and Saturday.Snow asked for a complete list, including addresses, and returned toBroad Street to continue his sleuthing. He stood at the base of thepump, and ran through the addresses on the list. From time to time,he gazed out at the empty streets around him, imagining the paths theresidents might take to find their way to water.

It was going to take more than body counts to prove that thepump was the culprit behind the Broad Street epidemic. Snow wasgoing to need footprints, too.

## Buildng the Case
A hundred yards west of the Broad Street Pump, in the dark alley of Cross Street,  a tailor lived in a single room atnumber 10, sharing the space with his five children, two of whomwere fully grown. On warm summer nights the heat in their crampedliving space could be unbearable, and the father would often wake af-ter midnight and send one of the boys out to fetch some cool wellwater to combat the sweltering air. They lived only two blocks fromthe pump at Little Marlborough Street, but that water had such an of-fensive smell that they regularly walked the extra block to Broad Street.

The tailor and his twelve-year-old boy had been struck in the firsthours of the outbreak, and both were dead by Saturday. Snow hadfound their address listed in the inventory of deaths that Farr had sup-plied him. Several other deaths were recorded on Cross Street as well.The location had caught Snow's eye when he first arrived back at the pump to survey the surrounding streets, armed with the addresses ofthe dead. Almost half the deaths Farr had recorded were linked to ad-dresses within his line of sight; and half the remaining ones came fromresidences that were only a matter of steps from Broad Street itself.The Cross Street deaths were unusual, though: to make it to the BroadStreet pump from there, you had to wind your way through two smallside streets, then take a right onto Marshall Street, then another left,and then walk a long block down Broad Street. To get to the LittleMarlborough pump, though, you simply strolled down the alley,walked two short blocks north, and you were there. It was within yourline of sight if you stood at the very end of Cross Street.

Snow had noticed another element while scanning Farr's records:the deaths on Cross Street were much less evenly distributed than theones in the immediate vicinity of the pump. Almost every housealong Broad Street had suffered a loss, but there were only a handfulof isolated cases on Cross Street. This is what Snow was looking fornow. He could see at a glance that he'd be able to demonstrate thatthe outbreak was clustered around the pump, yet he knew from ex-perience that that kind of evidence, on its own, would not satisfy amiasmatist. The cluster could just as easily reflect some pocket of poi-soned air that had settled over that part of Soho, something emanat-ing from the gulley holes or cesspools—or perhaps even from thepump itself. Snow knew that the case would be made in the excep-tions to the rule. What he needed now were aberrations, deviationsfrom the norm. Pockets of life where you would expect death, pock-ets of death where you would expect life. Cross Street was closer toLittle Marlborough, and thus should have been spared in the out-break, according to Snow's theory. And indeed, it had largely beenspared, but for the four cases Farr had reported. Could those caseshave some connection to Broad Street?

Sadly, by the time Snow arrived at 10 Cross to interview the tai-lor's surviving children, he was too late. He learned from a neighborthat the entire family—five children and their father—had died in thespace of four days. Their late-night thirst for Broad Street water haddestroyed them all.

In his mind Snow was already drawing maps. He'd imagined an overview of the Golden Square neighborhood, with aboundary line running an erratic circle around the Broad Streetpump. Every person inside that border lived closer to the poisonedwell; everyone outside would have had reason to draw water from adifferent source. Snow's survey of the neighborhood, based on Farr'sinitial data, revealed ten deaths that lay outside the boundary line.Two of them were the tailor and his son on Cross Street. After a fewhours of conversation, Snow determined that three others were chil-dren who went to school near Broad Street; their grieving parentsreported that the children had often drunk from the pump ontheir way to and from school, Relatives confirmed that three othercasualties had maintained a regular habit of drawing water fromBroad Street, despite living closer to another source. That left tworemaining deaths outside the border with no connection to BroadStreet, but.Snow knew that two cholera deaths over a weekend waswell within the average for a London neighborhood at that time.They might easily have contracted the disease from a different source altogether.

Snow knew that his case would also revolve around the inversesituation: residents who lived near the pump who survived, because,for one reason or another, they had opted not to drink from thepoisoned well. He reviewed Farr's list again, looking this time for telltale absences. There were a handful of deaths reported at 50Poland Street. On its own, this was a predictable number: PolandStreet lay immediately to the north of the pump, well within Snow'simagined border. But in scanning the list, Snow realized that thenumber was strikingly low, because 50 Poland Street was the addressof the St. James Workhouse, home to 535 people. Two deaths wasroutine for a household of ten living off of Broad Street. A popula-tion of five hundred living close to the pump should have seendozens of death. As Whitehead had already learned from his dailyrounds, the workhouse—despite its destitute and morally suspectinmates—had been something of a sanctuary from the outbreak.When Snow interrogated the workhouse directors, an explanationimmediately jumped out at him: the workhouse had a private supplyfrom the Grand Junction Water Works, which Snow knew from hisearlier research to be one of the more reliable sources of piped water.The workhouse also had its own well on the premises. They had noreason to venture Out to the Broad Street pump for water, eventhough it lay not fifty yards from their front door.

Snow noticed another telling absence on Farr's list. With seventyworkers, the Lion Brewery at 50 Broad was the second-largest em-ployer in the immediate vicinity Yet not a single death was recordedfor that address in Farr's list. It was possible, of course, that the workershad gone home to die, and so Snow paid a visit to the Lion's propri-etors, Edward and John Huggins, who reported with some baffle-ment that the plague had passed over their establishment. Two workershad reported mild cases of diarrhea, but not a single one had shownsevere symptoms. When Snow inquired about the water supply onthe premises, the Hugginses replied that, like the workhouse, thebrewery had both a private pipeline and a well. But, they explained for the benefit of the teetotaling doctor, they rarely saw their mendrink water at all. Their daily rations of malt liquor usually satisfiedtheir thirst.

Later, Snow would visit the' Eley Brothers factory, where he foundthe situation much more dire. The proprietors reported that dozensof their employees had fallen ill, many of them dying in their ownhomes over the first few days of the epidemic. When Snow noticedthe two large tubs of water that the brothers kept on premises fortheir employees to drink from, he scarcely needed to ask where thewater had originated.

Snow had heard through the grapevine that the Eley brothers'mother and their cousin had recently perished of cholera as well,both of them far removed from Golden Square. The coincidencemust have immediately struck Snow; perhaps he even thought backto the experimentum cruet's gauntlet thrown down by the London Med-ical Gazette so many years before. No doubt, considering Snow's dis-cretion, he posed the question delicately: Had Susannah Eley by anychance consumed some of the water from the Broad Street pump? Itmust have been an anguished moment for Snow: how to extract theinformation he needed without revealing that the brothers' thought-fulness had been the agent of their mother's demise. Snow's taciturndemeanor would have helped him as the brothers described their reg-ular deliveries of pump water to Hampstead; a more volatile investi-gator might have responded to the revelation of that crucial clue withmore emotion. But whatever emotion he showed the Eley brothers,when he stepped out of the factory into the bright light of BroadStreet, he must have thought to himself with some satisfaction that, the case was coming together quite nicely indeed. The miasmatistsmight finally have met their match

Snow's observational talents extended beyond the human body.The sad irony of his argument for the waterborne theory of cholerais that he had all the primary medical explanations in place by thewinter of 1848-1849, and yet they fell on deaf ears for almost adecade. The tide' eventually turned not because of his skills as a doc-tor or scientist. It wasn't lab research that would ultimately persuadethe authorities; it wasn't direct observation of lz;' cholerae itself. It wasSnow's faithful, probing observation of urban life and its everydaypatterns: the malt-liquor drinkers at the Lion Brewery; the late-night trips for cold water on hot summer nights; the tangled web of privatewater supplies in South London. Snow's breakthroughs in anesthesiahad revolved around his polymath skills as a physician, researcher, andinventor. But his cholera theory would ultimately depend on his skillsas a sociologist.

Equally important was the social connection Snow had to the sub-jects he observed. It is not an accident that of the dozens and dozensof cholera outbreaks that he analyzed in his career, the one for whichhe is most famous erupted six blocks from his residence. Like HenryWhitehead, Snow brought genuine local knowledge to the BroadStreet case. When Benjamin Hall and his public-health committeemade their triumphant appearance. on the streets of Soho, they werelittle more than tourists, goggling at all the despair and death, andthen retreating back to the safety of Westminster or Kensington. ButSnow was a true native. That gave him both an awareness of how the neighborhood actually worked, and it gave him a credibility with th eresidents, on whose intimate knowledge of the outbreak Snow's in-quiry depended.

Snow shared more than geography with the working poor ofGolden Square, of course. While he had long since elevated himselfin social status, his roots as the son of a rural laborer colored his per-ception of the world throughout his life—primarily in the sense ofblocking out certain dominant ideas. Nowhere in Snow's writings ondisease does one ever encounter the idea of a moral component to ill-ness. Equally absent is the premise that the poor are somehow morevulnerable to disease thanks to some defect in their inner constitu-tion. Ever since he observed the Killingsworth mining outbreak as ayoung apprentice, Snow had long known that epidemics tended toafflict the lower orders of society For whatever reason—probably some mix of rational observation and his own social awareness—that disparity led Snow to seek external causes, not internal ones. Thepoor were dying in disproportionate numbers not because they suffered from moral failings. They were dying because they were being poisoned.

Snow's resistance to the miasma theory was methodological aswell. The strength of his model derived from its ability to use ob-served phenomena on one scale to make predictions about behavioron other scales up and down the chain. Observed failure of certain'organ systems of the body could predict behavior of the whole per-son, which could in turn predict behavior in the social body en masse.If the symptoms of the cholera concentrated around the small intes-tine, then there must be some telltale characteristic in the eating anddrinking habits of cholera victims. If cholera was waterborne, thenthe patterns of infection must correlate with the patterns of waterdistribution in London's neighborhoods. Snow's theory was like a lad-der; each individual rung was impressive enough, but the power of itlay in ascending from bottom to top, from the membrane of the smallintestine all the way up to the city itself.

And so Snow's immunity to the miasma theory was as overdeter-mined as the theory itself. Partly it was an accident of professionalinterest; partly it was a reflection of his social consciousness; partly itwas his consilient, polymath way of making sense of the world. Hewas brilliant, no doubt, but one needed only to look to William Farrto see how easily brilliant minds could be drawn into error by or-thodoxy and prejudice. Like all those ill-fated souls dying on BroadStreet, Snow's insight lay at the intersection point of a series of so-cial and historical vectors. However brilliant Snow was, he wouldnever have proved his theory—and might well have failed to concoctit in the first place—without the population densities of industrialLondon, or Farr's numerical rigor, or his own working-class up-bringing. This is how great intellectual breakthroughs usually happenin practice. It is rarely the isolated genius having a eureka momentalone in the lab. Nor is it merely a question of building on precedent,of standing on the shoulders of giants, in Newton's famous phrase.Great breakthroughs are closer to what happens in a flood plain: adozen separate tributaries converge, and the rising waters lift the ge-nius high enough that he or she can see around the conceptual ob-structions of the age.

You can see the convergence of all these forces in Snow's regimenthat Wednesday. In the midst of the most important investigation ofhis life, he was still a working physician, managing the diffusion ofgases. He delivered chloroform to two patients: One having hemor-rhoids removed, the other having a tooth extracted. He spent the restof the day in the streets of his neighborhood, probing, questioning,listening. Yet each conversation, however intimate, was shaped by theimpersonal calculations of Farr's statistics. He drew lines of connec-tion between individual pathology and the wider neighborhood; heshifted perspective seamlessly from doctor to sociologist to statisti-cian. He drew maps in his head, looking for patterns, looking for clues.

By the end of the day, Snow had built a convincing statistical case against the pump. Of the eighty-three deaths recordedon Farr's list, seventy-three were in houses that were closer to theBroad Street pump than to any other public water source. Of thoseseventy-three, Snow had learned, sixty-one were habitual drinkers ofBroad Street water. Only six of the dead were definitively not BroadStreet drinkers. The final six remained mysteries, "owing to the deathor departure of every one connected with the deceased individuals,"as Snow would later write. The ten cases that fell outside the imaginedboundary line surrounding the Broad Street pump- were equallytelling: eight appeared to have a connection to Broad Street. Snow hadestablished new causal chains back to the pump water, beyond the listof Farr's addresses: the proprietor of the coffeehouse who often soldsherbet mixed with Broad Street water told Snow that nine of her cus-tomers had died since the outbreak began. He had drawn the tellingcontrast between the Lion Brewery and the Eley Brothers factory; hehad documented the unlikely safe haven of the Poland Street Work-house. He even had his experimentum crucis in Hampstead.

It was, on the face of it, a staggering display of investigative work,given the manic condition of the neighborhood itself. In the twenty-four hours since he'd received Farr's early numbers, Snow hadtracked down intimate details of behavior from the surviving familyand neighl;ors of more than seventy people. The fearlessness of theact still astonishes: as the neighborhood emptied in terror from the most savage outbreak in the city's history, Snow spent hour afterhour visiting the houses that had suffered the worst—houses thatWere, in fact, still under assault. His friend and biographer BenjaminWard Richardson later recalled: "No one but those who knew himintimately can conceive how he laboured, at what cost, and at whatrisk. Wherever cholera was visitant, there was he in the midst.

## The Pump Handle

On Thursday Night, the Board of Governors of St. James Parish had held an emergency meeting to discuss the on-going outbreak and the neighborhood's response. Halfway into themeeting, they received notice that a gentleman wished to addressthem. It was John Snow, armed with his survey of the past week'sdevastation. He stood before them, and in his odd, husky voice toldthem that he knew the cause of the outbreak, and could prove con-vincingly that the great majority of cases in the neighborhood couldbe traced to its original source. It is unlikely that Snow went into theintricacies of his broader case against the miasma theory—better togo straight to the telling patterns of death and life, leave the philoso-phizing for another day. He explained the dismal ratios of survivalamong the people living near the pump, and the unusual exemptions_granted to people who had not drunk the water. He told the Board of Governors of deaths that had transpired far from Golden Square, connected to the area only by the consumption of Broad Street wa-ter. He may have told them of the brewery of the workhouse onPoland Street. Death after death after death had been linked to thewater at the base of the Broad Street well. And yet the pump re-mained in active use.

The members of the Board were skeptical. They knew as well asany other locals how highly regarded the Broad Street water was—particularly as compared to the Other nearby pumps. But they alsoknew firsthand the smells and noxious fumes that were rampant in theneighborhood; surely these were more responsible for the outbreakthan the reliable Broad Street water. Yet Snow's argument waspersuasive—and, besides, they had few other options. If Snow waswrong, the neighborhood might go thirsty for a few weeks. If hewas right, who knew how many lives they might save? And so, aftera quick internal consultation, the Board voted that the Broad Streetwell should be closed down.

The following morning, Friday, September 8, exactly a week afterthe outbreak had first begun its awful rampage through Soho, thepump handle was removed. Whatever menace lay at the bottom of the well would stay there for the time being.

The deaths in Soho would continue for still another week, and thefinal reckoning of the assault of the Broad Street well on the neigh-borhood would not be calculated for months. The removal of thepump handle was generally ignored by the newspapers. On Friday,the Globe had published an upbeat—and typically miasmatic—account of the present state of the neighborhood: "Owing to thefavourable change in the weather, the pestilence which has ragedwith such frightful severity in this district has abated, and it may behoped that the inhabitants have seen the worst of the visitation. Yes-terday there were very few, deaths, and this morning no new cases were reported." On the following day however, the news appeared tobe less encouraging:

>We regret to announce that after the account was written which ap-peared in The Globe of yesterday, there were several severe and fatalcases of cholera, and that seven or eight were reported on Saturdaymorning, although the wisest precautions were adopted to arrest theprogress of the disease. The neighbourhood of Golden-square pre-sented a most melancholy and heart-rending appearance. Therewas scarcely a street free from hearses and mourning coaches, and theinhabitants of the district, appalled by the calamity which has visitedthem, crowded the streets to witness the last sorrowing act of dutytowards their neighbours and friends. A vast number of the ttades-people left their shops and fled from the place, the closed shuttersbearing the announcement that business had been suspended for afew days. Messers Huggins, the brewers, with praiseworthy fore-thought, have issued an announcement that the poor may obtainany quantity of hot water for cleansing their dwellings, or other pur-poses, at any hour of the day or night, an act of humanity and kind-ness of which a large number have availed themselves

Dozens would die over the next week, but clearly the worst wasover. When the final numbers were tallied, the severity of the outbreakshocked even those who had lived through it. Nearly seven hundredpeople liVing within 250 yards of the Broad Street pump had died in aperiod of less than two weeks. Broad Street's population had literallybeen decimated: ninety out of 896 residents had perished. Among theforty-five houses extending in all directions from the intersectionof Broad and Cambridge streets, only four managed to survive theepidemic without losing a single inhabitant. "Such a mortality in so short a time is almost unparalleled in this country" the *Observer* noted. Past epidemics had produced higher body counts citywide, but nonehad killed so many in such a small area with such devastating speed.

The removal of the pump handle was a historical turning point, and not just because it marked the end of London'smost explosive outbreak. History has its epic thresholds where theworld is transformed in a matter of minutes—a leader is assassinated,a volcano erupts, a constitution is ratified. But there are other, smaller,turning points that are no less important. A hundred disparate histor-ical trends converge on a single, modest act—some unknown personunscrews the handle of a pump on a side street in a bustling city—andin the years and decades that follow, a thousand changes ripple outfrom that simple act. It's not that the world is changed instantly; thechange itself takes many years to become visible. But the change is noless momentous for its quiet evolution.

And so it was with the Broad Street well that the decision to re-move the pump handle turned out to be more significant than theshort-term effects of that decision. Yes, the Broad Street outbreakwould burn itself out over the next few days, as the last victims diedoff and other, more fortunate, cases recovered. Yes, the neighbor-hood would slowly return to normalcy in the weeks and months thatfollowed. These were real achievements that arose from that pumphandle being removed, even if the water in the well had potentiallybeen purged of T./: cholerae by the time Snow made his case to theBoard of Governors. But the pump handle stands for more than thatlocal redemption. It marks a turning point in the battle between ur-ban man and Vibrio cholerae, because for the first time a public institu-tion had made an informed intervention into a cholera outbreak based on a scientifically sound theory of the disease. The decision toremove the handle was not based on meteorological charts or socialprejudice or watered-down medieval humorology; it was based on amethodical survey of the actual social patterns of the epidemic, con-firming predictions put forward by an underlying theory of the dis-,ease's effect on the human body. It was based on information thatthe city's own organization had made visible. For the first time, the V. *cholerae*'s growing dominion over the city would be challenged byreason, not superstition.