---
title: Technology, Democracy, and Rebellion
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-03-16 14:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-11
    - lecture
---

##### Prof. Thomas Streeter

## Intro
Welcome to the online version of our lecture for the week. I hope that everyone is doing well during this difficult time. Also, I kind of feel like at the beginning of the year John Snow's reading. How things like disease and media communication can be linked when we don't imagine that they would be. 

## The Readings
Both Teachout and Tufekci have used new technologies and studied them in political changes in the last few years. They have looked at the interaction between them and their political systems and have alot of interesting things to say about them.

### Zeynep Tufekci
I wanted to begin by introducing the authors for the readings this week. This is Zeynep Tufekci, she tought the sociology of pandemics, which i didn't know until I read her new piece in the New York Times. She's a very interesting scholar. Last October, she was studying the uprisings in Hong Kong. 

### Zephyr Teachout
This is Zephyr Teachout, who is a law teacher / politician. She has written a book about corruption in the US, and has run for office several times. When I met her, it was in the aftermath of Howard Dean's run for president in 2003-2004. 

## Last Class
We went talked about the decline of the public sphere, where instead of media facilitating discussion about rational discussion and debate, but instead been used to centralize control and define imagine communities that encourage the power of central forces. Last class, we talked about how Napoleon used newspapers and imagined communities to excert his power. He was fairly authoritarian to the people. We also talked about Coughlin, who used a huge following on the new technology of Broadcast Radio to advocate a north american version of fascism. Should he had succeeded, he would have had us take Germany's side in WWII. We also looked at Chomsky and Herman to use media for propoganda rather than debating public issues. These were all examples of using media to concentrate power; narrowing number of voices and centralizing things. Nicholas Garnham was saying that these new technologies are appearing, what should happen to Habermas' public sphere now? should we have some control over it?

## Today
Going to go through some cases of how technological changes have opened up some new possibilities for polticial action, bringing in new voices to poltics. The first case will be the internet campaigh in US politics for Howard Dean's run for president. And the second is the Arab Spring. But first, we need to go back and look at the influence of TV Advertising in the 20th century. 

##
There is a recurring issue with conducting democratic debates in a modern industrialized world. You can't get everyone together face-to-face. With millions of citizens, any candidate trying to run for prime minister or president, you cannot meet everyone face-to-face. That would mean that anyone running for this position would require the use of modern media to communicate with voters. Countries like Canada, among others has created strict rules governing the length of campaigns, limiting use of TV advertising and making long-format rule governed tv debates. 

Federal Election debates last fall, it starts in the middle, take a moment to watch and get a flavour of it.

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/MG6in0Ix4SY?start=14890&end=15380" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Canadian televised debates are much more informative than those that occour in the states. However, while Canadian pariticpation in elections is much more healthy than the United States, the turnout is much lower than previous years. Shifting to the US, it is in part legal decision that any political things are a violation of law. For the 2nd half of the 20th century, US tv advertising became a staple of US Politics. In 1952, a war hero by the name of Dwight Eisenhower was running for president in the US as a republican candidate. In 1952, TV was a brand new technology. People were just beginning to bring home wooden cabinet TV sets with small black and white screens and put them in their living rooms. Excitement around TV was real at the time. That was the context when the following appeared across the land:

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/YmCDaXeDRI4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Back in 1952, poltical experts were astonished and freightened. This one minute ad had no mentions of Eisenhower's platform or qualifications. It was advertising the candidate as if he were a consumer product, as if he were a consumer product like soap. He went on to win the election. After this, nearly all of the US were quick to adopt television. TV ads for political campaigns became more and more pervasive.

1968 Nixon was running for president, the vietnam war was raging. the 1960's counterculture was exploding on the scene. Nixon was a republican. His campaign ran this ad on Television.

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/P1PBBuCFtN0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This advertisment has a much higher prodution value than the 1962 one, colour, edited. It doesn't say anything about Richard Nixon's policies, yet he still won the presidency and became the only US president to resign under cloud of scandal.

As politics in the US became increasingly dominated on television, there arose several issues. Due to the fact that TV ads were expensive, meaning that politicians had to increasingly spend more of their time fundraising, getting money. For most of the 20th century was fundraising from wealthy people. The first thing they would have to do was the "money primaries". At the beginning of the candidacy, the candidates would have to raise funds. The media began to keep track of how much money candidates were raising, and became the viability of a candidate. To get elected, you'd have to be elected by rich people first. Then you stand before the american people. The money primaries, and the huge dependance on the huge amounts of money started to influence campaigns and infiltrated their everyday lives. Politicians would soon worry about raising money for the second election. 

A second fact about TV advertising was the search for free media. The ways to get exposed was to do free media on the news. You'd have to do things that would generate news coverage that would not do what hurt their reputability. They would do photo-ops; places where the media would be. Doing things on the behalf. Getting pretty pictures that generate news coverage and exposure. The other related effect was shallow controversy. If one candidate says something negative about the other one, you could call up candidate y and ask about criticism. They had perfect "he said she said reporting". X and Y say something, then respond. You don't have to evaluate who is telling the truth, you don't have to worry about taking sides, but the coverage becomes shallow he-said-she-said stories. You don't look at their policies or their record. In the 2016 election, the most dramatic example was Trump, where he would trashtalk. Candidates would feel obliged to respond. Because Trump was a fountain of lies, this made running for office ever-more expensive. Politicians had to do more and more fundraising; setting the agenda of elections. Generated interest for free media. Shallow forms of news and shallow controversies. Another factor in all of this was that things were appearing in TV shows. There was nowhere to find serious news coverage in this process. Had very little room for anything. Trying to commmunicate through soundbytes. Not much about what people need to know to make informed choices in voting. 

Finally, what this general campaign system lead to was a pattern in which because things were driven by a perceived center of politics (money primaries) you couldn't run against the wealthy. What began to happen was that politicians began to realize that people were always going to run for republican or democrat. A narrow sliver of voters that hadn't made up their minds. In the last month of an election campaign, voters were not paying attention. They felt they had to rely on image and dog-whistle kind of appeals (impulse buys). As these patterns increased throughout the 2nd half of the 20th century, voter particiaption dropped off; because of tv, people began to question why they even vote.

Big changes in social patterns usually happen over years, this is true of poltical patterns as well. Howard Dean's presidency run was the beginning of alternatives to the television advertising based form of campaigning. In 2003, Dean was a little-known Vermont Governer. He ran in the primaries in the US as a democrat. No one paid attention, wrote him off at first. As his campaign progressed, he became the leading candidate. No one had ever seen this before. He couldn't have done this without the internet. This was the first internet campaign in politics. 

### Context
After 9/11, there was a strong environment of solidarity. As time went on and the Bush government started to shift away from helping people at home to a plan to invade Iraq. The national consensus began to unravel. The world in 2002 going into 2003 of US poltics was very uncertain. Most democrats voted to support the invasion of Iraq. Al Gore began speaking up in new ways (centerist) and Howard Dean was arguing that it was not justified and not a good idea. In october of 2002, a small blog called moveon.org astonished people by raising $2.2 million in 2 days for an anti-war senator Paul Wellstone. This was alot of money from non-rich people and was surprising at the time. 

At the beginning, when Howard Dean was thinking of running for president, he had no particular idea of running for president. He didn't have an email. Because he was a doctor, he wanted to fix the healthcare system. He realized that he would be a stealthy campaign that would get paid no attention to. He said his strategy would be to surprise everyone in Iowa by placing in 3rd or 4th and building off that. His first effort on the internet was titled "Fund for a Healthy America". It was a static site that had a few phone numbers. 

Back then, there was no Facebook or social media. There was people buying things and blogs to let you know people existed. One of the things that started to happen when Dean got started, he was one of the few candidates that was opposed to the war, his campain, which was based in Vermont, they noticed a number of emails coming in, but a desire to help, act. People felt that they needed to do something to help. Dean's assistant was flooded. To her surprise, supporters were searching for a contact for the campaign. She didn't know where people were getting the message. Zephyr: word started to get out. An independent mail list began to happen around the Dean Campaign. Was being organized on the internet, expressing poltical concerns in new ways. In January of 2003, Gerome Armstrong posted a link on his poltical blog called MyDD. He talked about politics at the time. He posted a link to meetup.com. This was a site to meet up with people in your area. You'd put up a notice 'anyone interested in this, meet up at x'. It was using the internet to get together face-to-face. It wasn't cyberspace. It was a tool to meet face to face. Gerome created a meetup for Dean. This started people meeting up all across the country. Joe Tripping noticed all of this spontaneous activity with people getting together through the campagin framework. Said this is unusual, we should use it. Dean then gave his "What I want to Know Speech".

In the next 2-3 months, everything changed. Alot of it had to do with meetups. In Vermont, they wanted to know what they could do about them. They saw that if everyone was to go to the bar. The campaign office started telling people that "tell everyone in NYC to go to this meetup". The media showed up to see what they thought would be a cozy small meeting. There was a line all the way around the block. The national media said that there is something going on here. Started to cover Dean. People meeting up, talking to people inside the campagin. The media got interested because on one hand it was an unusual campaign, and on the other, it was something never done before. The media would say something, then people would generate new events from this. Started to have fundraising. Microtransactions and donations. When 10's of thousands of people started to send money, Howard Dean began to break fundraising records. This was usually done by vetting candidates by going through rich people. Political experts began to become interested because of the fundraising numbers. Dean was doing it in a way no one else had ever done it before. Dean had people talking about him late in the game. Fairly early he was becoming something of a media star. 

It's important that when a new technology comes about that it doesn't replace old communication, but transforms the old technologies. This was very true about journalism. Their authority and their relationship to readers changed. Jodi Wilgoren who worked for the NYT noticed that Dean started to make a splash. They sent Jodi in to go to Vermont to follow Dean around. She had no idea to what extent that Dean was popular. She didn't have direct access to the public. So, early on she went to Vermont and said that supporters were hippies. She was saying that it was just a bunch of hippies up there. As a resident of Vermont, Streeter knew alot of hippies and Dean supporters. Streeter knew there was some difference, but Jodi did not. With the internet, Dean supporters set out to do something about that. Went to the web to do something about her reporting. With a few clicks, people could read criticisms about her. Instead of a journalist being the word of god, it became a debate between Dean supporters and her. Reporters today are used to being criticized, have a different sense of audience. 

The fundraising continued over the summer. He was treated as a very serious candidate. He was later treated as a front-runner for the democratic nomination. Once you're the front runner, Journalists begin to be quite critical. Started to attack him as an outsider that didn't know what he was talking about. He went in as someone being attacked daily in the media. The Dean Scream: 

[see video]

The Dean video was a glorious failure, but at the time, the mainstream media still had alot of force. They were able to sideline what he was saying by using things like the scream as saying things rather than common sense. He took positions that he thought were true rather than what others wanted people ti hear. The dramatic example of this was the invasion of Iraq. Said that this was not enough evidence. Looney for saying it at the time. He said that US would only be there for a few months. He said that they would be there for years. At the time, US is still in Iraq. One of the things that was hard to talk about: specifically in strucutres of feeling. We're going to talk about what it was to talk about in the Dean Campaign. In the inside feel very distinctive. But one of the things about working for the Dean Campaign, people would say he was authentic "the real thing". Participating in something genuine and empowering. In being involved in an insurgent poltical campagin that was almost successful celebrating what it was like to be part of it.

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/YaHYlIQ1Eqo" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Even though he lost, Dean's run had alot of influence. He brought alot of new voices into politics. Alot of people became poltical regulars and activists because of Dean. So, it didn't go as far as people wanted it to, but it was a shift in the basis of political organization. This began to be picked up by other politcal candidates. For example, many campaign veterans began to assist Barack Obama. You can see the influence of Dean Campaign in many subsequent campaigns. Bernie Sanders' Campaign has also been heavily influenced. You can use the internet not only as a place to create alternate universes, or an information source, you can use it to connect with people. Alot of people that created Web 2.0 were influenced by the Dean Campaign in talking to people horizontally. For what it's worth, Dean is still active; he had something to do with another outsider candidate that was the first openly gay presidential candidate to win a primary in the US.

Now I want to run directly to the Zephyr Article, I am going to provide some long quotes of what to look for. One of the themes was the discovery that people want to participate and become part of a poltical movement. They don't want to be talked to, but rather a part of what's going on. This created a shift in communication patterns to horizontal communication within groups. For teachout, this gives people authority and power, recognizing intellegence and it's an effective way to do politics. There are alot of people worried about losing control. If people are allowed to do what they want, how are we supposed to create genuine interaction. In the Dean Campaign, this was very revolutionary to those of you that think of email as an old thing. Email lists as a form of campaigning was new. What they were discovering was that lists of people that care about you were powerful tools in organizing people to take part in politics. 

> “Perhaps the most important innovation was something more subtle: the idea that supporters were competent citizens, should be respected, and should be encouraged to be inventive in their own local communities. That idea was not arrived at in a specific moment, but it came out of those months of dependency on others-others' work, others' creativity, others' intelligence. Only after we had thoroughly adopted it did we realize how controversial it would be-both inside and outside the campaign.”


> “Zack and Eli explained that e-mail growth-not site visits-should be the core driving most of our efforts. Websites were secondary to e-mail communications. They explained how most growth happened around specific campaigns- petitions or drives- and that we should be using our e-mail lists regularly and forcefully to share ideas and grow our list. They showed us charts of Moveon growth, and shared particular ideas about e-mail style and form. These ideas have since overtaken political communications like kudzu, but at the time they were radical, and they gave us a driving purpose. From that visit forward, we were centered around e-mail. ”


> “Ten years ago, someone with an old toaster would have had to accumulate a garage full of unused materials to hold a garage sale and find a buyer-someone wanting to buy that old toaster would have to wait at least until a summer Saturday to scour the garage sales for one. eBay allowed people to post a picture of the toaster within an hour of deciding to buy a new one, and a buyer could look for one on a midwinter midnight. Match.com and online dating services enabled people to find dates the moment they moved to a new town, instead of waiting for the seventh Saturday night when they finally knew enough people. For politics, however, everything still depended upon a central organizing structure, one that rarely held any kind of events in late primary states. A supporter would typically have to wait until the candidate came to town- often never- to find other supporters, or go through the local party machinery, which had developed its own arcane habits. Once found, the primary role of most supporters was fund-raising or stamp licking-roles for citizens so narrow that most simply didn't engage. It was as if, upon going to eBay, you were only allowed to trade televisions and bicycles. The opportunities didn't match the desire of citizens to contribute. ”

In this quote, it's one of many passages in Teachout's article where the internet enabled, which would have been very hard beforehand. Political campaigns were run in a very top-down fashion. You didn't have a sense of ownership. Connection was very one-way. The internet allowed for a much richer sense of connection. This was a kind of new energy and conceptualization around how to do politics.

Since 2004, between 2004-2013, more and more people began noticing these patterns and organizing people towards them. You could gather people together to coordinate horizontally organized powers. I can't go through all the details, they weren't always on the left. Some started using the Dean techniques, this happened on the right. In 2008, people on the conservitive side were quite dispair. They viewed the Bush administration as a failure. People started organizing tea parties. This movement began a nationally coordinated effort that by 2010 it had a huge impact on American politics from the right.

On the global stage, prehaps the most dramatic example of this internet powered political movements was the arab spring. Before 2010, most arab countries were run by autocratic regimes; many corrupt. It was felt by most people that that's how it is in those countries. In December of 2010, a poor man called Mohammed Bouazizi burned himself to death in ways that the government was restricting his ability to move freely. This setoff protest movements in Tunisia, later spreading to Syria where small scale protests begin the following month. In Egypt, people poured into the square in the capital that quickly gained attention and the supposedly irreplacable of Egypt resigned to the world's astonishment on Feb 14, 2011. This was a huge victory to the democratic activists. This lead to the constitutional refurendum being held, then in Lybia, the NATO took over lybia, brining together a more democratic society. 

But then, one by one; all of the democratic revolutions fell apart. Things went sour. In 2016, the Economist listed the countries by their political structure. Syria is still ripped apart today. Egypt, Algeria, Iraq, Morocco all moved to autocratic restricted democracies. One of the big questions is what happened: why wasn't the internet revolution successful? People were technologically determinant. If you just introduce new technology, it will solve issues. 

Both of the readings for this week are very interested in this. The social conditions to autocracy are already there, and the early discussion of the Dean Campaign and Arab Spring were very determinist. The idea that dropping tech and democracy automatically follows. Williams talked about this earlier in the semester.

This brings us into the 2nd reading of the week. She is always encoraged by technolgy in social contexts. Again, these quotes are indicators of what you should be looking for in her article when you read it. 

> “Power always learns, and powerful tools always fall into its hands. This is a hard lesson of history but a solid one. It is key to understanding how, in seven years, digital technologies have gone from being hailed as tools of freedom and change to being blamed for upheavals in Western democracies—for enabling increased polarization, rising authoritarianism, and meddling in national elections by Russia and others.”


The first quote here is her pointing to the technological determinism fantasy. 

> “After [Obama’s] second win, MIT Technology Review featured Bono on its cover, with the headline “Big Data Will Save Politics” and a quote: “The mobile phone, the Net, and the spread of information—a deadly combination for dictators.”

She goes on to point out that she and some others were already worried because of microtargeting: carefully feeding people algorithmically generated information to fit their tastes could be used to wreak halvok in the pubic sphere. You wouldn't know


> “However, I and many others who watched authoritarian regimes were already worried. A key issue for me was how microtargeting, especially on Facebook, could be used to wreak havoc with the public sphere. It was true that social media let dissidents know they were not alone, but online microtargeting could also create a world in which you wouldn’t know what messages your neighbors were getting or how the ones aimed at you were being tailored to your desires and vulnerabilities.”


So, it's the technology of microtargeting that is perfect for selling the latest gadget or leather shoes. A good political tool is not an effective marketing tool.


So, Tufekci argues that how the US got themselves into this mess allowed Social Media Platforms

> “the handful of giant US social-media platforms seem to have been left to deal as they saw fit with what problems might emerge. Unsurprisingly, they prioritized their stock prices and profitability. . . . They spent their time solidifying their technical chops for deeply surveilling their users, so as to make advertising on the platforms ever more efficacious. In less than a decade, Google and Facebook became a virtual duopoly in the digital ad market.”

And this created a virual duopoly between Google and Facebook. She also then discusses more recent authoritarian poltical insurgencies like the far rightgains in Europe, Duterte in Philippines. They use the microtargeting: create sense of community with sense of outrage; detachment from larger poltical world from people different from themselves. I think that they use the microtargeting capabilities to help contruct ethnically nationalist imagined communities.

> “Digital tools have figured significantly in political upheavals around the world in the past few years, including others that left elites stunned: Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, and the far right’s gains in Germany, Hungary, Sweden, Poland, France, and elsewhere. Facebook helped Philippine strongman Rodrigo Duterte with his election strategy and was even cited in a UN report as having contributed to the ethnic-cleansing campaign against the Rohingya minority in Myanmar.”

So, towards the end of her article, Tufekci says

> 1) “First, the weakening of old-style information gatekeepers (such as media, NGOs, and government and academic institutions), while empowering the underdogs, has also, in another way, deeply disempowered underdogs. Dissidents can more easily circumvent censorship, but the public sphere they can now reach is often too noisy and confusing for them to have an impact. Those hoping to make positive social change have to convince people both that something in the world needs changing and there is a constructive, reasonable way to change it. Authoritarians and extremists, on the other hand, often merely have to muddy the waters and weaken trust in general so that everyone is too fractured and paralyzed to act. The old gatekeepers blocked some truth and dissent, but they blocked many forms of misinformation too.”


> 2) “Second, the new, algorithmic gatekeepers . . . make their money by keeping people on their sites and apps; that aligns their incentives closely with those who stoke outrage, spread misinformation, and appeal to people’s existing biases and preferences. ”

> 3) “Third, the loss of gatekeepers has been especially severe in local journalism. While some big US media outlets have managed (so far) to survive the upheaval wrought by the internet, this upending has almost completely broken local newspapers, and it has hurt the industry in many other countries. That has opened fertile ground for misinformation. It has also meant less investigation of and accountability for those who exercise power, especially at the local level.”

> 4) “The fourth lesson has to do with the much-touted issue of filter bubbles or echo chambers—the claim that online, we encounter only views similar to our own. This isn’t completely true. While algorithms will often feed people some of what they already want to hear, research shows that we probably encounter a wider variety of opinions online than we do offline, or than we did before the advent of digital tools. . . . Rather, the problem is that when we encounter opposing views in the age and context of social media, it’s not like reading them in a newspaper while sitting alone. It’s like hearing them from the opposing team while sitting with our fellow fans in a football stadium. Online, we’re connected with our communities, and we seek approval from our like-minded peers. We bond with our team by yelling at the fans of the other one. In sociology terms, we strengthen our feeling of “in-group” belonging by increasing our distance from and tension with the “out-group”—us versus them.” 


> “This potent combination explains why, since the Arab Spring, authoritarianism and misinformation have thrived, and a free-flowing contest of ideas has not. Perhaps the simplest statement of the problem, though, is encapsulated in Facebook’s original mission statement (which the social network changed in 2017, after a backlash against its role in spreading misinformation). It was to make the world “more open and connected.” It turns out that this isn’t necessarily an unalloyed good. Open to what, and connected how? The need to ask those questions is perhaps the biggest lesson of all.”

Tufeki is an optimistic person, and offers some solutions,

> 1) “Ubiquitous digital surveillance should simply end in its current form. There is no justifiable reason to allow so many companies to accumulate so much data on so many people. Inviting users to “click here to agree” to vague, hard-to-pin-down terms of use doesn’t produce “informed consent.” If, two or three decades ago, before we sleepwalked into this world, a corporation had suggested so much reckless data collection as a business model, we would have been horrified.


> 2) “There are many ways to operate digital services without siphoning up so much personal data. Advertisers have lived without it before, they can do so again, and it’s probably better if politicians can’t do it so easily. Ads can be attached to content, rather than directed to people: it’s fine to advertise scuba gear to me if I am on a divers’ discussion board, for example, rather than using my behavior on other sites to figure out that I’m a diver and then following me around everywhere I go—online or offline.


> 3) “Even the free-for-all environment in which these digital platforms have operated for so long can be seen as a symptom of the broader problem, a world in which the powerful have few restraints on their actions while everyone else gets squeezed. Real wages in the US and Europe are stuck and have been for decades while corporate profits have stayed high and taxes on the rich have fallen. Young people juggle multiple, often mediocre jobs, yet find it increasingly hard to take the traditional wealth-building step of buying their own home—unless they already come from privilege and inherit large sums.”


Stay safe.
B.