---
title: Mobile Privatization
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-02-03 14:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-5
    - lecture
---

[Readings]()
#### Prof. Thomas Streeter

I threw alot of very diverse meaning to you. It might take a bit to connect the dots. Now I'd like to set this up. You may remember Raymond Willimas, who was sceptical of McLuhan's idea that television changed society. The idea of McLuhan's technological determinism is not that simple. Technology is not outside of social institutions.
> "The invention of television was no single event or series of events

If TV is not just out of a research lab, how to we look at this life-defining thing that we call TV? Williams calls this "Mobile Privitization"
> "Broadcast television was a response to ..."


> "Systems of mobility and transfer in production and commmunication, whether in mechanical and electric transport, or in telegraphy, photography, motion pictures, radio and television, were at once inccentives and responses within a phase of general social transformation. ... there was a crucial community of selected emphasis and intention, in a society characterized by general levels by a mobility and extension of the scale of organizations: forms and growth which brought with them immediate and longer-term problems of operative communication... **In no way is this a history of communications systems creating a new society or new social conditions** (this is steeter's work). In the decisive and earlier transformation of industrial production, and its new social forms, which had grown out of a long history of capital accumulation and working technical improvements, created new needs but also new possibolities, and the communications systems all the way down to television, were their intrinsic outcome."
- Raymond Williams

Towards his argument of TV being embedded in society, he backs up and looks at the history of communications of technologies. He talks about mobility, production and communication Incentives and responses, he doesn't want to say these things mechanically caused social change, but instead looked at it as these things being there to create incentives... I can do something with that. The steam boat, etc. created an international... By 1890, you were interested in what was going on in MTL, Ottawa, in the far west, the south, in the US, and institutions were getting bigger. All of that mobility, we needed to coordinate everyone's behaviour with a social order.

> "There is an operative relationship between a new kind

It's not just figuring out price of goods in far away cities, it's how are we going to organize our social relationships. 1972, men as all people. Relations between people and things, specifically the relation between things had very little to say. For example, a church or a town square in a little market, or maybe your kids went to school. Your family (extended) defined your experience. That wasn't working enough any more. People wondered how you were supposed to live life? People would give answers but they'd typically be inadequate. If you want an example of this, your marriage was arranged by a local matchmaker in your village and they'd say "this is your wife". Now, you can get a train ticket and work hundreds of miles away. Arranged marriages started to taper off and attraction starts to be important. 

# Mobility
In terms of media with all this social change, was the rise of newspapers. They met social needs of a new kind. Helped with vote, etc. Even until the 1930's it didn't include all white men, and women weren't added until the 20th c. As newspapers started to appear, the newspapers became a new social institution. People objecting to newspaper due to policy. If you didn't like the local paper in the US, people would burn it down. There were hundreds of cases of social upset like this in America. This created an increased awareness of mobility and change. It wasn't like academia, where people needed to restructure, but instead the function and process of social communications. This was all being turned upside down.

Mobility , by williams here we can get a sense of mobility was like in a peasant village versus life today. In a peasant village, life was defined by a social family, everyone knew who their cousin was and felt a duty to them. People lived on or near a farm, travel was expensive, horse, boat and foot were the only methods of transportation. People spent their entire life living a few km from where they were born. People's lives were rooted in church, family and tradition. Today, we move around quite a bit more than we used to. It is not uncommon to go 60 km each way to work. People are doing this by the 10's of thousands. People choose to live far from their place of birth, some 10's of thousands of kilometres. Home is not where you were morn necessarily. This is a new, modern condition. One of these is that we are in contact with strangers all of the time. You see strangers everyday. You are visible to them, they are visible to you. It becomes possible to become lonely in a crowd. In tradition, loneliness means you were actually separated from society. Being near people meant being connected. Now, we can be near people and not feel entirely connected. It's a peculiar thing. It's said that your cellphone contact list is a better map than a map of your neighbourhood. You're still in contact with people who are far away.

# Privatization 
Now, privatization, in response to all of that mobility, people increasingly cut themselves off from people around them. We live in apartments, not caring to know who we are around. College students are the least privatized than the rest of societies. The separation of work, play, private and public is a lot blurrier. You go into some distance, take off the tie, take off nice clothes, you're in a different space. That is a very modern thing. You are at work, behave differently, act differently, say different things, etc. We start to appreciate the strong divisions between the public and private. We create a quiet space away from work. We call this the domestic scene. This is the notion that Privatized spaces are where we consume and use technologies: refrigerators, cars, plumbing, media. 

Now, this set of trends has been a long time coming. In Paris of the 1850's, for the first time they redesigned Paris from a medieval city with narrow allies to wide boulevards that enable people to mingle that we now see in many city centers. The Flaneur was a person wh could hang out. Baudelaire said
> "For the perfect flaneur, ... it is an immense joy..."

Sitting at a cafe, watching people go by. We've all done this right? People watching, not watching people you know is a very modern experience. You are connected, but not to people. This became a shallow way of comms. This was celebrated as early as the 1850's.

Calling cards / name cards were used by the rich to upper class for people to leave. If you wanted to find someone, "HEY WHERE'S ____", eventually the calling card became a societal norm. There's one where they're talking about Laura, the teenagers (young people) as a special thing save up their money and go to the print shop, buy cards and go to the square and share the card with their friends. In the little town on the prairie, young Laura trades cards with who would soon be her husband. The point here is that using technology to step into a world to encounter strangers. This idea of presenting yourself using technology has been going on for a while. 

# Nazi Germany
Now, there are other institutional responses, and it kind of pains me to go into this kind of example, and is not irrelevant today. There is an authoritarian movement that forced social anxiety that forced itself into Italy, Japan, etc. In a world where people were unsure, in that world, one answer is I'll tell you how to feel like part of something... There are these other bad people somewhere. They are worse than us, they're bad, we're good, etc. That could be jews, chinese or koreans. It could be lower casts of your society, different religions. We're going to make you feel like a group, and make a powerful binding force for some people. You discourage private life, make people participate. People were not just asked to watch a show, but to participate in the culture (Nuremberg Rallies). Being part of a public rally, at the time will tell you it felt fantastic. It's the feeling of being part of something yourself. Privatizing was something not used by Nazis, and instead neighbours would rat you out, etc. For the history of Broadcasting, the Nazi era they had one of the first broadcasting services in the world. What they did is they created "TV Parlors" they created mini theatres in the berlin area, and had intention of bringing the country together. It would be the way of getting people together to hear the latest (Nazi) news. Here's just a few clips that were captured on film from Nazi TV with subtitles.

<iframe style="width: 43vw; height: 35vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/bEYfl-X2Jcc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

That last clip is using double-entendres to talk about shipping around jewish people. It was not publicly announced that people were being killed in camps. One way to tell the story is that Hitler made them feel like a street gang, strength through joy. The Nazis were very much about strength. Now, the moral here is that there are different ways to respond to the alienation and confusion people feel in the modern world. There is not one way to do it. Authoritarianism offers a solution to social problems. If you way of bringing people together is separating them, it often ends in bloody conflict. A substantial percentage of the human population went in this event. It's about how mobile privatization is just one way to do it. It's not just the only way. Questions or comments about this?

# Broadcasting to the Home:
Back to Raymond Williams, what he says, if you're trying to understand the radio communications: the radio had become a major sector of industrial production. This became a major part of national and international business. Radio was being sold to people alongside toasters, stoves, cars, refrigerators. This is where he starts moving towards the term mobile privatization. On one hand, mobility, on the other the self-sufficient home. Broadcasting as we know it was a response to the tendency of mobile privatization. Part of what he's saying is that mobile privatization is inseparable from Mobile Privatization. The idea of suburbia is that you need a way to connect from inside the home, and becomes a whole way of life. 

# The Media and Mobile Privatization
The institution of broadcasting: mobility was only part of teh independent curiosity. The old ways were part of the condition of the new mobility. It also then created new places to live, and work and increase separation between them. All of this stuff comes together around the small family home. Privatization, which was at once an effective achievement and a defensive response, carried as a consequence, an imperative need for new kinds of contact. 

The media brought mobile privatization into privatized spaces. Media encouraged mobile privatization. The advertisements on TV and your television screens are all examples of how great privatized life is. The ads, etc. encourage us to participate in the privatized phones, etc. 

So, just to back up and talk through the development of the ways of living:

```
1880's: Telephone exchanges in cities
1900: RCA made dog famous, made photography accessible to everyday people. Recorded music and photographs. 
1910-30's: Phone service begins to become common. The first cheap motor vehicle (Model T) by Henry Ford started emerging.
Late 1940's: Beginnings of 45 records, cheap, created a whole new aspect of music industry, top 40 radio started to appear. 
1979: Sony Walkman
2002: Most phones in world are cell phones.
2005: Facebook
2008: iPhone was released.
```

Raymond William's argument was that all of these gadgets are our response to an inducement of a mobile privatized lifestyle. We are increasingly invited to create private personal bubbles for ourselves. There is no technological wizardry involved, but the cup holder in the car. Everyone wanted cupholders. This functionality is to make it feel like a living space rather than a vehicle. 

You don't want to live in an apartment complex, the complex is designed to be a private space that we interact with. iPods, etc. iPhones and other smart phones define our lives. This is an unsurprising picture on the subway now, where everyone is on their cellphones. 

## People coming together
A rock concert, church: people no longer use lighters, but rather cellphones. It does bring forth the question "are we increasingly alone together?". We're not going to look at this together, but rather look at touchstones of this. strength of weak ties: Granovettter: there are strong ties in social life, where you're very closely connected. Your best friends, your strong ties are not going to get you a job or new business. Instead, you look at these weak ties, they may be a friend of a friend, someone you have a very tenuous connection with, you can start going through a list of acquaintance, etc. to try getting a job. Weak ties provide access to resources instead of intimate ties. You need a certain amount of that to get by. 

Extensive vs. intensive reading. Intensive reading is when you read just a little bit. The question is what is the balance of these things. 

## Alone together
Questions so far? So, Sherry Turkle, Alone Together is concerned that we are relying too heavily on weak ties. It's a matter of degree. We are forgetting how to do intimate bonds and have communication without purpose. TMI is a phrase that emerged alongside social media. We've lost touch and people tell you too much personal stuff... This is an ongoing discussion we are going to continue through the semester. This is why in the session I bring up this essay, The "Third Place". The First place is the home, the second place is work, and the last is your public (churches, cafés, clubs, libraries, book stores, parks). The workplace is novelty and diversity. The idea that you are the employee, I am the boss, etc. You can put those things aside if you want to. Going for drinks with colleagues requires a pretty good boss. IT's not about fulfilling a specific goal, but rather a specific goal, or function we are trying to preform.

The idea of hangout commentary. [Letterkenny](https://trakt.tv/shows/letterkenny) is similar to this, where people just stare at the camera, tell jokes and make fun of eachother. Film: Diner

<iframe style="width: 43vw; height: 35vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/F3QANzPkkR4?start=110" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

So, before we get into the question, it's guys talking about nothing, being emotional about nothing with no particular point. The producer saw this scene, thought it needed to be cut, director fought for it. It's also the same year the TV show [*Cheers*](https://trakt.tv/shows/cheers) came out, if you haven't seen *Cheers*, prehaps you've seen [Friends](https://trakt.tv/shows/friends) a lot of the action happens in the coffee shop. Deep interaction with people you know who are not part of your immediate family often seem to be crucial. The woods behind the high school. The idea of hanging out. The third places, I think it works as a description of social worlds we create, question is
> "are there electronic third places?"

Can they really fulfil the same function?

In a short answer, sure: people go online and amuse themselves, playing video games and interacting with other players. The cases for me that are most compelling are, this is going to sound obscure, but it has a point. People who have rare medical conditions and connecting with people who have it, it's so bonding and satisfying. There are many things at work. You can then know "yeah, I know what it feels like". It gets disturbing when people say "oh yeah...". Sometimes online there is a shared embodied experience that connects people. 

Question from the floor: "Because you are online, and are able to connect with more people, is that what makes it satisfying?" 
In short, yes. When someone pipes up from 1/2 way across the planet, the modern political organizing on the internet, the strategy on the US left was began with using the internet to get people face to face. you find people, then get together. The first major internet campaign: Dean... No one knew him outside of Vermont. There were meets, organized online. They broke out online. Bernie Sanders campaign was very similar to this. The question is SCALE: how much can come out of that campaign? On the opposite end of the spectrum: he did no tv advertising, but did large rallies to organize support. There's still this question of are electronic functions functional or dysfunctional? 

``` break ```

# Kofka & Jeenska Letters
I did an unusual thing, even for someone like me. I included a letter from Franz Kafka to Melena Jesenska: Summer 1920. This requires some explanation. In the summer of 1920, Kafka and Jesenska both grew up in Prague, what is now the Czech Republic. She was Czech and gentile and he was educated in German and Jewish. He had published, at that point only a few stories. He contacted her and asked if she could do some translation work. Some letters were sent between them, and then it blossomed into an affair (short-lived and intense) between Vienna and Prague in the summer of 1920. Named Kafka one of the great literary writers of the 20th c. What we do have are Kafka's letters to her, as they were preserved. They were an interesting read. They were two people living in intense times, where they needed to get money to buy paper, stamps, etc. and wrote with steel fountain pens. They were both rebelling against their fathers. She, as a young woman was not allowed to be sent to the finer schools. She got the "secondary education" as she was taught by jewish men. She started hanging out in coffee shops with jewish professors. Her father was a Czech white nationalist and could sense that she was talking to jewish men. Her father soon learned of this and threatened to disown her. Kofka's father was born in a pre-modern tiny Jewish village and made a living as a rag pedlar. He'd sell bits of cloth from a cart. He scrambled to raise himself. He was eventually considered a successful middle class man. He wanted his son to go to college, get a respectable job, respectable wife. Franz Kafka was resistant to all of that, and had broken off an engagement to a young woman in her early 20's because it felt false to him. He had dedicated his life to transcendent literature. Wanted and expected to make no money from. According to his father, this could not lead to anything good. Franz and Milena start corresponding and her partner in Vienna was having public affairs. He viewed himself as a liberal and told her that she should do the same. She was a bit alone, so they started writing back and forth. Now, The letters they are works of art in their own sense. They were both very skilled and unique writing. I can't take the time to go into detail about that part, but they were pioneers in living in a mobile-privatised world. A lot of their letters were about mobility in communication. 

## The Letters: Railroads, Borders, Stamps, Schedules.
Apparently she writes a letter to Kafka that says "come to me"... This is somewhere in that, they're trying to arrange a triste. He goes on about all of these details. We are reading this as he was afraid of intimacy. This was such a big thing for him. He ends this letter by saying "but tomorrow please keep writing"... He talks about waiting for her letter. But then, he sent another one that evening. They often sent 2-3 letters / day. 

There are also other passages that talk about their conditions. He talks about groups fleeing Russia. The anti-semitism was very prevalent in eastern europe. There were riots outside of where these Russian emigrates were trying to get to America. The tiki torches mobs, chanting against nationalism. They were facing this on a day-to-day lives. 

## The Joys and Sorrows of a Mobile Privatized Life
The sexual relations were so patriarchal... go out with lower class women and buy beers, etc. Better than most alternatives. Kafka thought this was not right, wanted something else. There is a little bit of the letter, there is alternative forms of patriarchal rituals. There were new connections being formed across the world, it was risky. One of the things you can read in the letters is that you'd get a few close friends involved. We read into this and find out that stacsha was sitting in front of this very strange man, thinking "Melena, what's going on" (this is speculation). 

Melenia died in a concentration camp during WWII. Her and her friends wore stars to stand in solidarity with the Jews.

### The Letter of March 1922
One of the most famous about the ironies of communication at a distance. The letter is no longer you, it's instead the heart and truth. He's talking about his whole corpus of letters, where one letter cooperates together and acts as witness. What he's referring to, I think is the simple fact that writing at a distance removes communication from the distance, or the person's own body. It may start out excited or impassioned, but eventually over time the letter beings to turn into a thing. One of the things that makes this any form of communication at a distance, whether it be a handwritten letter, a text, email or gif: is it gif or gif(jif)? It goes beyond us. It is much the soul to soul connection we wish we had. It's a characteristic of technology. You can fall in love just over handwritten letters. But, it could also turn into something else. My letters that I write to you lie about me. Think about your Facebook or Instagram. Are they true representations of your everyday self?  You'll go back and ask what was I doing, what was I thinking?

Kofka, going on: talking about the way in which communication technologies tend to be expressions of our true selves and extensions tend to have a life of their own. One may say that Melenia says that she was the one who best understood him. He concludes the 1922 letter: he has to hit this moment. It's a Kofka kind of sadness. There's another part of this letter where he thought they really communicated directly through letters.

The reason why I wanted to talk about the letters exchange between Kofka & Melenia in this context of mobile privatization, some people treat it as a mobile ideology, where we should be sitting around a camp fire and communicating. This is similar to what Raymond Williams wants to say, and talking about this romantic exchange between the two writers in this time, mobile privatized life is making something out of the world that the world is trying to push them into. It's enormously compelling. I'm not one to think that we need to "unplug" and go back into... Part of the connection in a mediated world is that we are never going to feel this way. And that is the condition of the mobile-privatized world.

> Floor Question: Never being fully complete?
- I think that written language always has its own effects... Most of the time, you get close enough. The words, technology, styles, and language have a density that is bigger than ourselves that has its own effect. 
> I am more confused about how you said in a mobile privatized world it'll never be complete. Are you trying to say that kind of concept? 
- The ghosts of the letter: It's about the act of writing having its own force beyond what you intended it to be. Your car not starting in the morning, and the mashup of anglosax and french. There's always something bigger than us that is shaping. I think that technology has it's own world to play doing things outside of our control..


We're going to talk quite a bit more about this semester about what is outside our control in various aspects of this mediated  culture. 

## Advice for You Young People
We're all a bit confused, and when communicating, choosing when and how to communicating, take a deep breath before saying something, or typing on your keyboard. So, be careful with yourself and be understanding of others when trying to grope about these new forms of communication. It's all in flux. Strong ties do matter, everyone needs to cultivate a few. Think about how many close ties you have in your life. Maybe there's an old family friend... Find someone you can trust to know where they live, and have them know where you live. If you're wondering if you have any of those relationships, I recommend it. I'm not saying that you have more to find to confess to someone. Not necessarily someone that will approve, but rather someone who you can bury your soul into. Keep your eyes open for what works well and what doesn't. Facebook, Twitter and the Internet are changing rapidly. As algorithms and people change, look at these things as hand gliding rather than using a toaster. It requires practice, skill and caution. Treat social networks cautiously, don't take them for granted. Don't mistake mere intention for effective communication. Think about building community that can function in the real world, and whether you're organizing a dance or political demonstration. Partly, I'm saying this as young people. That's just a few words about how to live in this confusing world for now. In the future, we're going to talk about how to make sense of the big picture, and how to make sense of it from there.

```
end
```