---
title: Feelings
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-20 14:30:00
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - week-3
    - lecture
---
# Feelings
#### Prof. Thomas Streeter

Before lecture, see [Readings for Week 3](/week-3/)

## Table of Contents:
1. [Introduction](#Introducton)
2. [What Shapes how We Think?](#what-shapes-how-we-think)
3. [Social Structure and Everyday Life](#social-structure-and-everyday-life)
4. [Structures of Feeling Version I](#structures-of-feeling-version-i)
5. [What is the conteporary Structure of Feeling?](#what-is-the-conteporary-structure-of-feeling)
6. [Structure of Feeling Version II](#structures-of-feeling-2)
7. [Jordan: Letters form Australia 1840's](#jordan-letters-from-australia-1840s)
8. [Jordan: Multiplayer Online Games](#jordan-multiplayer-online-games)


## Introduction 

Last week, we looked at Black Mirror and closes a systematic loop. There is an important morale to the story: economic structures can absorb all kinds of things. Just because you aren't the most repatious captialist in the world doesn't mean you're part of this system. At some point you won't want to imagine yourself as a marionette (a puppet). This is what we are calling "The World of Feelings". Now feelings seem strictly personal, while they are strictly to a being, people live lives through feelings and our feelings do not come from a vaccuum; it's something going on to make you put on blue jeans. In other kinds of places, that's not what college students would have thought. Where do surprises come from? Live is not rigid in structure, there is much that happens that no one predicted would happen. Today, we are going to talk about the dictivity of feelings. 

Today, you read difficult material: Raymond Williams - when I pick up that chapter, which I've read many times, I still have to work through it. If you've never seen it before, I imagine it would be quite difficult. When reading something difficult, you may wonder "why can't he write in plain english". With a difficult reading, it is important to give it space. Look at the diction of the text and admit if you don't understand something. I'll help you with that reading today in a variety of ways. I would like to call to your attention to the reading.

## What Shapes how We Think?

Beethoven: interrupted the entourage, in the early 1800's it happened more and more. Marx noticed the nobel people were not getting the respect that they wanted. Marx sorted out social change. He'd seen things like Beethoven; noticed that people organized production differnetly in the city. He made a generalization based on something that no one had looked at before. Using capital as a way of organizing life. 

> "The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e. the class which is the ruling material force of societym is at the same time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to it. The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships, the dominant material grasped as ideas; hence of the relationships which make the one class the roling one, therefore, the ideas of its dominance"
- Karl Marx, *The German Ideology*

Giving lords overhead: Futal Lords had clasp of mounting soldiers, horses, etc. As big piles of money and patterns of investment, people rejected the idea of the heiarchy. Marx saw this as an attack on Feutal Heiarchy. The ideas of the ruling class impact the ruling ideas. Is that the whole story?
- If we live in Neo-liberal Capitalism -> does that make me a Neo-Liberal Capitalist thinker?
How else can you think despite the insight. It really explained alot. 

## Social Structure and Everyday Life
In question, from the days since Marx. Social structure is real, it's there: Marx was right. However, poeple are complicated ,active, imaginative, but people are sometimes unpredictable. But more importantly, people act through their understandings, their perspectives, not as marionettes. People use their imagination to create ideas. How does everyday life relate to structure?

Something basic about human communication. Everyday discourse between people is one of the things that define us. You might think that one person has an idea, then communicates it through language. As an aside, apologies for the stick figures on the slide. You may just be exchanging information. Suppose one person is thinking "what's for lunch" and the other person is thinking "i love you and i want to be with you forever"... What would happen if left person told right person what they were thinking straight out to eachother... Do you guys still say "awkward". One person might say "cold outside, isn't it?" other person says "sure is". People aren't usually relaying new information. You need to establish that you're ok with eachother. You meet a stranger, you can't just ask "do you think I'm attractive"? you need to establish relatively stable social relations with those around us. Most situations are just being OK with eachother. It takes energy, work. By the time you're in college, you're a master of communication, you can navigate complex conversations, etc. It's what early sociologists call micro-sociology. For Raymond Williams, most of culture, from the mundane to the grandest works, from talking about hte weather to Shakespeare or Star Wars, are one of the places where poeple actively react to, reporduce, and change social structures. The excerpt I gave you is in a dialogue with aspects with Marxism. It's part of the core principals in way people conducted marxist analysis. There is some kind of core in society: Patrearchal, racial heiarchy, capitalsist, etc. You lead based on these features. Williams doesn't try to aruge the points, but used the term "feeling" to distingish what is going on in everyday life from large generalizations. 

## Structures of Feeling Version I
Moments of social change: eg. Williams recalled the experience he had, upon returning to Cambridge University after service in WWII. "I had been away only four and a half years," he wrote, but as he reflected on the "strange world around" him, he concluded, "the fact is, they just don't speak the same language."
Raymond Williams: a "structure of feeling" is something that "is as firm and definite as 'structures' sugests, yet it operates in the most delicate and least tangible parts of our activity... We are talking about characteristic elements of impulse, restraint, and time; specifically affective elements of conciousness and relationships: not feeling against thought, but thought as felt and feeling as thought." 

Growing up after the french, american revolution: bowing felt like something he didn't need to do. Europe was going through an industrial capitalist revolution. Beethoven didn't think about those things, he just felt different. 

## What is the conteporary Structure of Feeling?
Can we talk about our own structures of feeling? In recent years (10-15 years) "is that really a thing?" people are not saying "is this waterbottle a thing", it's usually something social; a way of asking if something is OK: in reference to behaviour etc. asking that question is a question of "is something socially constructed is real? or is it sometihnig someone made up". Part of what is being asked, Your generation will have to talk about something. It's a way of manouvering. It's pretty fluid at least on an everyday level. It's crude: men wearing a dress, is that a thing? There is a kind of fluidity in alot of social norms. By fluidity, I mean it's changing alot or to expect change. It would be like knowing about a meme culture. Most undergraduates will talk about a meme, everyone will start to smirk... Sometimes I'll look at a meme and wonder what the hell is the point... That is an aspect of young people's culture today. You can't reduce it to an ideology, but you can certainly relate it back to structure of feeling. The creativity is in the captions: while being true and cutting it also says something about everyday life. 
>"Are alot of memes about anxiety?"
- Streeter (2019)

The rise of IG influencers: even if you can make money, why would you go about it that way?

## Structures of Feeling 2
Now, so far I've been talking about SoF with anecdotes. Now I'd like to look more directly at what exactly Williams says in some passages from that chapter. I'm going to A. try to help you read Raymond Williams, and B. How to read carefully.

Early on, he doesn't begin with what he means by Structure of Feeling
> The reduction of the social to fixed forms that remains the basic error"

- He's engaged in a dialogue with Orthadox marxism. This may be a look at how the bourgois are making a living. Class conciousness: if you treat it like a fixed form... The reduction of the social to fixed forms. When you go from "there's a bunch of people kinda organized this way" to a fixed form -> this is what he's arguing in this passage.

> The mistake, as so often, is in taking terms of analysis as terms of substance
Don't treat it as if it's a solid thing. Use it as a tool for analysing things, but don't take the terms of analysis as terms of substance.

> "Thus we speak of a world-view or of a prevailing idea or of a class outlook, often with adequate evidence, but in this regular slide towards a past tense and a fixed form suppose, or even do not know that  we have to suppose, that these exist and are lived specifically and definitively, in singular and eveloping forms..." 

- look at this Where he's going with that -> there are several perspectives that come out of a capitalist, or racist, etc. They're not presented to us as fixed hard substances.

Going Deeper
> The living will not be reduced, at least in the first person"
You cannot be reduced to your class conciousness, race, gender... 

> all the known complexities, the experinced tensions, shifts uncertainties, the intricate forms of unevenness and confusion
- at a certain point, if everything is reduced to class status, struggle, etc. If you do it against known complexities, you are by extension working against social analysis itself. It's a pretty deep claim against marxism... That reducing everything down shuts down social analysis...

> Practicial conciousness
- as you go through your day, how do you manouver? The stuff you know you do in the morning, etc. You need to pay more attention to prof's rules etc. All the little things you figure out aren't scripted, nor reading a set of rules... It's more of a feeling -> maybe I should call mom; I know she'll want to hear from me.
Roofer
- knowing if it's good enough to work on someone's roof today... that's a practical conciousness as well; knowing how to wire someone's phone... People had a century's worth of experience. Conciousness is pretty thin at the time. 

We don't just read a scirpt that's given to us by the dominant structure. In Canada, I enjoy the CBC,.. If you ever go to see the newest Marvel Movie, do you make fun of it? You absorb alot fo dominant culture, etc. That is practical conciousness... It is always different that official conciousness, and for Williams this is important.

So, structures of feeling then, is a way of trying to call attention to how everyday life relatess to the dominant. Raymond Williams would not say that everyone is struggling due to practical conciousness. It's not just boiled down to that. Making sense? Well, where we're going now is to think about different things that could shape practical conciousness. We've talked about letters and the days everything happened with mail. This is not written with a dipping pen but prehaps a fountain pen. A great aunt of mine that was in Germany (1951) it was still occupied territory... To arrange immigration to the US. This woman had lost nearly everything. Her only contact left was my grandfather's family who had fled Germany in the 30's. That is a pretty typical story of that era, many of you likely have similar stories. In the late 30's, airmail was introduced. You needed to get a whole lot of mail into a very small form factor. What you did was get a thin, tissue like envelope and squeezed as much writing onto it that you could, as it was by weight.

This was the front, you had to leave the address and the back clear, but... She wrote and wrote and wrote, then went down the edge, then wrote on the back of the thing you lick to close it, then wrote on the wings. This would have been [phone calls were impossible at this point] this  was the main form of communication across the atlantic. People were still writing in enormous details, yet still required reliable mail... Writing began to get smaller, and the bottleneck was writing. What can and can't be said via mail chagned. 

## Jordan: Letters From Australia 1840's
Give yourself some time to really read what writing looks like. This really goes back, where you're writing with a quill on a very expensive piece of paper. What could we do to go through the letters from Australia to Britain... How would you bind the paper from ME to YOU? This generated the requirement to connect people. This wasn't easy. In the greeting, you'd do "dearest so and so", or "best wishes", etc. in the 19th c. you'd go on for a long while.

Writing a text message versus a formal email. What signals it's you is on the phone "from so and so", where in the States, students would write emails to Professors "hey there", "hey tom", etc. I spent some time trying to figure out how to communicate in a student teacher relationship. It starts to kind of deteriorate the relationship between a student and professor.
Now, in the 1840's the signature was very important, it was like saying "this is really me". Does anyone still write checks? Do you have a fixed signature you sign a cheque with? In my youth, I had to create a real identity. The signature I settled into (when i was 16-17), it hasn't changed much. Signatures are dissapearing due to biometric authentication.

The most common felony, was cheque fraud. It functioned pretty well, as an identifier to say "this is me", we are connected in a very particular way. If you meet someone in between classes, talking about the weather, etc. Distant communications have routines to define the relationship. So, handwriting, seals: pour candle wax to seal the letter, then press a symbol into it. There were arts of pulling seals by melting it just enough... etc. But, the main function of a seal was to say "it's me". Another thing we do, we talk about yourself and your life, not to relay important information, but instead just to connect. If I were to talk about my back pain, etc. about personal life, or body to help certify that this is me and that I am connecting to you. 

It establishes that my relationship to you is more than just buisness, or is personal. Also, referencing last letter in new letter. This is a representation of a continuation from previous communication. Referring to other letters implies a more profound connection. He was enticed to how we made a tiny frail connection into a human connection. Evolving from this, letter writing techniques opened. In the 19th c. people would talk about their emotions feelings, etc.It was about establishing connections with others. 

``` 
Break
```

## Jordan: Multiplayer Online Games
Jordan talked about the nessecity of creating co-presence in letters. He also talks about online games: calls it an ethnography. Now, his arguement is that you still need to say "this is me"...  Identity markers are harder to fix on the internet, which is why Phishing is so common. A common phishing scam is to impersonate someone else, use identification number, etc. It's very easy to fake identity on the internet. So what do people do about that now? What Online Multiplayer games do now doubles the issue. When you're playing these games, you want to be the avatar. You create guilds and play as a team. In other terms of identity establishment, you're online with your buddies. What happens to identity and stability? Is "World of Warcraft" still played alot? No. When it was a big deal, it was intense, a world that was a post-tolkien characters. You could go in, get points and win. Being killed was but a temporary penalty. You'd still talk in teams so you could connect to people over a headset and a computer. An avatar is a deliberately fake online identity. Breaking from the fake world, Jordan notices that washing machine is overflowing, and because of this, breaks the online persona. A single player game, you can pause and everything will stop. That's its own kind of thing. It's like going to a movie but being part of the movie. You go into the drama. If you go see LOTR on the big screen, you are not actively consuming the media, and are not consumed by it. Even through it's completely fake, fictional and you don't know your other people playing with you, you still need to be identifyable. Need to play in the spirit of the game. There were things like no emoticons. It broke the frame. An unwritten ritual is to stay in character while playing the game. You're supposed to know enough about the game, the fictional world, etc. that you're going to preform it well. 


### On Letters, and Contemporary Communications
It's important to also use linguistic style. If your mother were to say "Thomas Jordan Streeter", you have just broken the rules and you are in trouble. Formal and informal is a very important structural turn. If you were to go to the supermarket and say "What is the cost of this item". Trump makes formal statements by writing things in twitter. People are interested in if the mode of communication (IE Tweeting) is a memo or not. In a guild, establishing these things is quite different. People have to do alot of work. What I want you to do is to go through life: I want you to keep tabs on how technology and society construct social relations. That work is constantly ongoing. 

I'll foreshadow one letter that's coming up in a few weeks: It's a letter from France C.... to a young woman he had an affair with in central europe in 1922. France was a struggling writer (kind of sickly) was brilliant in a strange way. He did not take off during his lifetime. He had a circle of friends that supported and respected him. He lived in hard times, after WWI. The economy collapsed, he wanted to be a writer but got no money out of it. Buying paper was hard. He was deeply committed, but he is now recognized as one of the best writers. His publisher was looking for a translator, He was about 30, going on 50, she was about 23, going on 30... Rebellious, father was appaled that she hung out with jewish people. She asked for the letters to be burnt upon her death. The letters start out with the formalities of the translation and how they connect. It's an amazing literary event. How they connect: wasn't very standard. He was terrified of intamacy. Would go squirrley... Knowing it now, you know that he's about to die from TB... you can already tell that his friends are telling him "this is not good". When reading it you will also know that she's going to die in a camp because she was too into democracy. Still fought for democracy, which spelled her doom. They are all deep, insightful and charming. Assigning identity through personal narration. He talks about his trousers, remember times of day, watch broken, antisemetic mobs carrying torches. This happened BEFORE HITLER in his Day to Day life, there were jewish people being beat up in the street. 

## Introudcing Readings on Technology
In the 1990's Steve Jobs was worshiped, now it's something like Elon Musk. In 2011, Jobs stepped down as CEO and was sick. He was an entroprenour, and had been fired from Apple, after bringing in a reputable CEO, Apple began to fail. Apple then rehired him and Jobs introduced the Macintosh, and years later the iPhone. There is a thing we do about innovation: individual devices are invented by individual people. This is a massive misunderstanding and miscredit. Steve Jobs was **credited** with the invention of the iPhone and iPad, but instead... The Unvailing of the iPhone. It's not always the story of creating new technology from someone's brain. The horse was at it's height in 1913 before the car. The horse kept growing as a technology as... The Rickshaw (hand drawn carton) was a technology that was popular. You'd think about it in new ways.

{% youtube 8JZBLjxPBUU %}

> "What is technology anyway?"


### Raymond Williams: What Technology is and What Causes It:
This piece was a reponse to Marshall McLuhan. He aruged that the television changed human conciousness. Williams looks at what exactly are we looking at in relation to television. Any questions?

Nope. We're done for today. Thanks very much.


